Uganda
Uganda failed to make progress on human rights and its international reputation
suffered in 2005. The conflict in northern Uganda claimed victims daily
and more than 1.5 million people continued to languish in displaced persons
camps, vulnerable to abuses by the brutal Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and
an undisciplined government army, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces
(UPDF). The Ugandan government arrested on treason and rape charges the
front-running challenger to twenty-year incumbent President Yoweri
Museveni, only three weeks after he returned from exile. Dr. Kizza Besigye,
the candidate for the opposition Forum for Democratic Change, was charged
with twenty-two others; when fourteen of those were granted bail, government
Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force agents in black suits entered the court
building and prevented all present from leaving. The chief justice denounced
the “rape” of the courthouse. Other political opponents and journalists were
threatened and put in jail for criticizing the government, and some, accused
of rebel collaboration or treason, were tortured in illegal detention centers.
The War in Northern Uganda
The nearly twenty year long conflict in northern Uganda continues to victimize
the population in the three districts of the Acholi, more than 90 percent
of whom are in displaced persons camps and are not free to return
home. The rebel LRA committed killings of civilians, torture, mutilations
and sexual abuse, including rape and forced “marriages” of girls to rebel
commanders, and abducted thousands of children and brutalized them, forcing
them to serve as child soldiers. Despite repeated assurances by the government
that it has won the war against the rebels, the LRA continues to
launch brutal attacks, often in response to such government assurances.
Three separate attacks on aid workers in northern Uganda probably by the
LRA resulted in the death of two individuals on October 26 and the injury of
four others. In November the LRA, appeared to threaten to target foreigners,
causing most international nongovernmental relief organizations to temporarily
withdraw their staff.
Peace talks between the Ugandan government and the LRA, mediated by
Betty Bigombe, a former government minister from the north, broke down
in early 2005 and fighting was renewed. The violence escalated after the
main LRA negotiator, Brigadier Sam Kolo, defected to the government side
in mid-February 2005.
The LRA continued to launch attacks against civilians in northern Uganda
from its bases in southern Sudan, and increasingly attacked Sudanese in
Sudan. In September 2005, some four hundred LRA rebels crossed to the
West Bank of the Nile in southern Sudan and, attacking Sudanese villages
along the way, crossed into northeastern Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC) where they were interviewed by the UN Mission in DRC
(MONUC). The Ugandan government renewed threats to enter the DRC to
deal with the LRA but did not act following widespread condemnation of any
action that would further destabilize northeastern DRC. The LRA appeared
to withdraw from DRC back into southern Sudan within the month, however,
and resumed attacks on civilians, killing two demining workers and one
relief worker south of Juba.
Soldiers and officers of the Ugandan army, which is deployed in or near
every displaced persons camp in northern Uganda, engaged in abuses in
2005, beating, raping and even killing civilians with near total impunity.
After more than a year’s investigation, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) issued sealed arrest warrants for five LRA leaders in October, asking
the Ugandan, Sudanese and DRC governments to enforce them. The five
include Joseph Kony, leader of the LRA, and Vincent Otti, the second-incommand.
Joseph Kony is to be tried on twelve counts of crimes against
humanity and twenty-one counts of war crimes, including murder, inducing
rape, intentionally directing an attack against a civilian population and forced
enlisting of children. The ICC was criticized by some civic and religious
leaders in northern Uganda for scuttling the peace process.
Political Freedoms
Bowing to growing international pressure to democratize Uganda and wean
the country off the Movement system of “no-party” politics, the government
organized a referendum on July 28 asking voters whether they wanted to
open up political space for parties to compete for power in elections scheduled
for March 2006. The main opposition coalition boycotted the referendum,
complaining that the decision by President Yoweri Museveni—who has
been president since 1986— to push through a constitutional amendment in
June that removed presidential term limits, allowing him to run for a third
term, undermined any efforts at democratic reform. A majority of voters cast
their ballots in favor of multi-party politics, but the turnout was low.
Opposition politicians critical of the government faced increased threats to
their safety and freedom with the stakes rising higher as the March 2006
presidential election date approached. On April 20, 2005, two opposition
members of Parliament, Ronald Reagan Okumu and Michael Nyeko Ocula,
were arrested by the Criminal Investigations Division of the police and
charged with the 2002 murder of a councilman. Both MPs are from Gulu
district in northern Uganda, are vocal defenders of human rights and critics
of the government’s conduct in the war against the LRA and are prominent
opponents of Museveni’s third term.
Okumu and Okulu were released on bail on May 17, but a number of other
members of the political opposition have been arrested on politically motivated
capital charges such as treason, including the chairman of the opposition
group Forum for Democratic Change in Rukungiri district in southwestern
Uganda.
In late October, Kizza Besigye, the failed candidate against Museveni in the
2001 presidential election, returned to Uganda from his four-year exile in
South Africa, despite hints that he might be jailed as a member of the “armed
opposition.” He won the nomination by the FDC as their presidential candidate
and began to draw large crowds while campaigning in the north and in
the southwest—his as well as President Museveni’s home area.
He was arrested three weeks after his return, on November 14, for a 1997
rape and for involvement in the LRA and another armed movement, the
People’s Redemption Army (PRA), based in DRC; unlike the LRA, the PRA
has not launched any attacks inside Uganda. The arrest prompted demonstrations
by his supporters that were met with tear gas; one person was killed.
During the entire bail hearing for fourteen of his co-defendants in court in
Kampala, on November 16, the court was surrounded and controlled by thirty
military commandos and two senior police commanders and several agents
in civilian clothes. The judiciary denounced this as “utterly despicable” and a
“day of infamy.” The presence of commandos in court during the hearing of
a petition was “simply unprecedented in the annals of this or any other High
Court. They unleashed an incredible chilling effect on the administration of
justice in this country,” the Principal Judge of Uganda’s High Court said.
Freedom of Expression
Uganda enjoys a relatively vibrant free press, especially in Kampala.
However, journalists who criticized the government on politically sensitive
topics still faced intimidation and arrest. Following the July 30 death of
Sudanese First Vice-President John Garang, many Ugandans speculated that
the Ugandan government was to blame for Garang’s death, although the two
had been close allies. Garang died when traveling in President Museveni’s
presidential helicopter; the helicopter crashed at night in the rain in southern
Sudan as he was on his way back from a meeting with Museveni. President
Museveni said that such speculation was a threat to national security and
would not be tolerated. When popular radio talk show host Andrew Mwenda
suggested that Garang’s death was the result of the Ugandan government’s
incompetence, Mwenda was charged with sedition and jailed on August 12.
KFM radio, which broadcasts Mwenda’s call-in show, was shut down for a
week and the independent newspapers the Daily Monitor and the Weekly
Observer, which ran a column by Mwenda, also faced closure. Mwenda was
released on bail after three days and returned to his radio show, but the arrest
casts a shadow on less prominent journalists in Uganda, especially in the
politically charged run-up to elections.
Torture
The use of torture as a tool of interrogation has featured prominently in
human rights violations by Ugandan security and military forces. Official and
ad hoc military, security and intelligence agencies of the Ugandan government
have illegally detained and tortured suspects, often in unofficial and
illegal “safe houses,” seeking to force confessions of links to rebel groups.
Torture and prolonged incommunicado detention, sometimes as long as two
years, in military barracks has been used against common criminals as well.
Despite a number of high profile cases and the work of the Ugandan Human
Rights Commission, a government body, verifying the use of torture, no one
was punished for it. In May, the UN Committee against Torture published a
report which found that these practices were still prevalent in Uganda in
2005. It called on the government of Uganda to end impunity for violators of
human rights and urged it to abolish “safe houses.”
HIV/AIDS
The Ugandan government was lauded internationally for implementing successful
HIV prevention programs in the 1990s. But the country adopted
U.S.-funded “abstinence-only” programs that jeopardize Uganda’s successful
fight against HIV/AIDS, with the support of conservative religious groups
inside Uganda and the First Lady. These programs included the removal of
critical HIV/AIDS information from primary school curricula, including
information about condoms, safer sex, and the risks of HIV in marriage—in
violation of the public’s right to accurate health information. Over the past
year, access to condoms in Uganda has been reduced dramatically due to
government recalls and new taxes and quality-testing requirements on
imported condoms, causing a shortage of condoms previously made freely
available in government health clinics. Stephen Lewis, U.N. special envoy for
HIV/AIDS in Africa, in August said the Bush administration’s policy of promoting
abstinence prevention programs and cuts in federal funding for condoms
have contributed to a condom shortage in Uganda and undermined the
country’s HIV/AIDS fight.
Key International Actors
The international donor community has been slow to respond to the nineteen-
year human rights crisis in northern Uganda, and for many years funding
for the humanitarian crisis was far from what was necessary. In 2005,
agencies such as UNICEF and the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs moved to expand protection and
human rights monitoring in the north and the U.N. Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights’ announced plans to deploy human rights
monitors to the same region.
Donor governments were more critical of the backward movement on political
reform in Uganda. Those that once praised Museveni withheld aid in
2005 in response to the lack of progress on democratic reform, symbolized
by the third term constitutional amendment and plans for President
Museveni to run again. Fears were that this would cause the entrenchment of
a one-party state. Uganda is dependent on foreign aid to finance 40 percent
of its budget.
In May Britain withheld U.S. $9.5 million in aid, accusing the Ugandan government
of poorly handling the political transition. Ireland also withheld
U.S. $3.5 million. In July Norway also withheld U.S.$4 million for what
Norwegian Ambassador Tore Gjos stated was his government’s displeasure at
“mishandling of the democratic process.” The Ugandan government blamed
the aid cuts on a negative campaign by the opposition who urged donors to
freeze aid to the Uganda. These measures, while symbolic (aid was only
“withheld”, not cancelled), pressured the government to hold a referendum
on a multiparty system, but the National Resistance Movement still controlled
all government institutions.
Several prominent critics of Uganda, including former U.S. ambassador
Johnny Carson, urged Museveni not to run again. A leaked unpublished
World Bank consultancy report described widespread corruption, nepotism,
and cronyism that permeate Uganda’s institutions, and urged the Bank to cut
its aid to Uganda. The Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
temporarily suspended its programs to Uganda due to “serious mismanagement”
of funds on August 24, then restored the funding later in the year.