Uganda
After 26 years of President Yoweri Museveni’s rule, increasing threats to freedom
of expression, assembly, and association raise serious concerns about
Uganda’s respect for the rule of law. The security forces continue to enjoy
impunity for torture, extrajudicial killings, and the deaths of at least 49 people
during protests in 2009 and 2011.
The government banned a political pressure group calling for peaceful change,
stopped opposition groups from holding rallies, and harassed and intimidated
journalists and civil society activists in 2012. Organizations monitoring governance,
accountability of public resources, land rights, oil revenue, and the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people face increased
obstructions. The notorious draft Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the
death penalty for some consensual same-sex activities, remains tabled in parliament,
threatening the rights of Uganda’s LGBT people.
After an eight-year civil society campaign supporting the bill, parliament unanimously
passed a law defining and criminalizing torture that the president
signed, bringing it into force in July.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
Police interference in, and unlawful obstruction of, public gatherings remains a
significant problem, often accompanied by arrests and detentions of organizers
and participants. In March, police stopped opposition leaders from touring a
public works project in Kampala, the capital. In the resulting melee, a policeman,
John Bosco Ariong, was hit by an object and died. Police closed off the
area, arrested over 50 people, and beat them in detention. One person was
charged with Ariong’s murder and is awaiting trial. The mayor of Kampala and
an opposition leader were charged with organizing an unlawful assembly with
the purpose of inciting members of the public against the police.
In April, the attorney general banned the political pressure group Activists for
Change, which orchestrated the April 2011 “Walk to Work” protests, labeling the
group an unlawful society under the penal code. The ban came a day before a planned rally to call attention to police abuse of opposition supporters. Police
placed opposition leader Kizza Besigye under house arrest without a court order
in April during the international assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
in Kampala, arguing that he would disrupt the meeting.
In October, as Uganda marked 50 years of independence, celebrations were
marred by protests and widespread arrests as the government stopped opposition
rallies, a “Walk to Freedom” protest organized by 4GC (For God and Country,
formerly Activists for Change), and house arrests of prominent political figures,
including Besigye and the mayor of Kampala.
Police restricted public debate and expression of concerns over governance
throughout 2012. For example, two authors of a book critical of President
Museveni—Doreen Nyanjura and Ibrahim Bagaya Kisubi—were arrested at the
Kampala book launch in April. Nyanjura was charged with participating in
unlawful society and inciting violence and detained for two weeks. In August,
Barbara Allimadi, a member of another pressure group, Concerned Citizens, was
arrested and briefly detained after staging a demonstration in parliament.
Police confiscated Allimadi’s t-shirts, which had anti-corruption slogans.
Journalists continue to be physically attacked and harassed by police in the
course of their work. Between January and June, a media watchdog organization
registered 50 attacks on journalists, despite multiple police pledges to respect
media freedom.
Restrictions on Nongovernmental Organizations
The government is deploying hostile rhetoric and an array of tactics to intimidate
and obstruct the work of nongovernmental organizations on sensitive
issues such as governance, human rights, land, oil, and the rights of LGBT people.
Tactics include closing meetings, forcing NGO representatives to issue
apologies, occasional physical violence, threats, harassment, and heavy-handed
bureaucratic interference in NGO registration and operations. NGOs are
required to register to work in Uganda, but due to government hostility, organizations
working on the rights of LGBT people cannot register to operate legally as is required under law. Senior government officials and police have unlawfully
tried to stifle discussion of LGBT rights.
In February, the minister of ethics and integrity closed down a meeting organized
by Sexual Minorities Uganda; in June, police broke up a meeting organized
by the East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders; and in August, police
shut down a gay pride march in Entebbe. In September, a British producer was
arrested and charged for staging a play about homosexuality, though he was
later released, and on November 8, police blocked another local theatre production
about the rights of LGBT people.
Torture, Extrajudicial Killings, and Lack of Accountability
Police leadership disbanded the Police’s Rapid Response Unit (RRU) in
December 2011 explicitly because of its poor human rights record, renaming it
the Special Investigations Unit (SIU). However the police have failed to investigate
abuses committed by RRU officers or ad hoc operatives, some of whom
continue to work with the SIU. In September, four members of the opposition
Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) appeared before court charged with treason.
They complained of torture in detention after having been detained by the SIU
for 14 days.
The government failed to investigate the killing of over 40 people by security
forces during the September 2009 riots, and the deaths of nine people during
the “Walk to Work” demonstrations in April 2011.
No charges were filed against the police officer who in April assaulted Ingrid
Turinawe, head of the FDC’s Women’s League, as police prevented her from
attending a rally.
Electoral violence marred six of the nine parliamentary by-elections held
between February and September. In Bukoto South, armed paramilitary groups
travelling in unmarked cars beat supporters of the Democratic Party candidate
on election day, despite a heavy police presence. Incidents of election-related
violence also occurred in other parts of the country.
There have been no arrests for the killings of three Muslim leaders this year. On
April 20, prominent Muslim scholar Abdu Karim Senatmu was shot by unknown
assailants and on August 18, Sheikh Yunus Abubakari was shot and killed after
leading night prayers. President Museveni claimed Sentamu’s death was due to
his connections with the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group operating
in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). In September, Imam Abdul Jowadi
Sentuga was also shot and killed. Police spokespeople said that the killings are
related to the ADF and promised to release a report, but it was not completed at
the time of writing.
The Lord’s Resistance Army
The Ugandan armed rebel group, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), continued to
kill and abduct people across Central African Republic, southern Sudan, and
northern DRC though at a reduced scale from previous years (see DRC chapter).
Warrants issued by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for LRA leaders in 2005
remain outstanding. The War Crimes Division of the High Court did not begin its
first trial of the only defendant in custody, former LRA fighter Thomas Kwoyelo,
who has been charged with willful killing, taking hostages, and extensive
destruction of property. Kwoyelo had previously applied for amnesty. In January,
the High Court ordered the prosecutors to grant amnesty and release him, but
the state has appealed and the case was, at this writing, pending before the
Supreme Court.
Uganda’s parliament permitted key provisions of the amnesty law to lapse,
meaning that for the first time since 2000, LRA fighters who end up in custody
could face criminal trial.
Bills Violating Human Rights Law
The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the death penalty for some consensual
same-sex activities, and the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act,
which criminalizes intentional or attempted transmission of HIV, are before parliamentary
committees and could still come up for debate and vote. The Public
Order Management Bill, which grants police overly broad discretionary powers in the management of all public meetings, was also presented in parliament
and was pending at this writing.
Key International Actors
On October 19, Uganda’s auditor general reported extensive fraud regarding
€22.9 million, prompting the governments of Denmark, Ireland, Norway,
Sweden, and the United Kingdom to suspend development aid. No one has
been held accountable for the loss of US$44 million which disappeared in the
lead-up to the 2007 Commonwealth meeting, despite multi-year donor efforts to
recover the funds. Three ministers who were to face prosecution returned to
office.
International bilateral donors continue to press the government to respect LGBT
rights. United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton presented the State
Department’s 2011 Human Rights Defenders Award to the Civil Society Coalition
on Human Rights and Constitutional Law, for its efforts to defeat the Anti-
Homosexuality Bill.
In contrast to donor pressure on LGBT rights, there has been minimal criticism of
security force conduct. US reliance on the Ugandan military for regional counterterrorism
operations may explain the diminished criticism of Uganda’s deteriorating
domestic human rights record. The army continues to receive logistical
support and training from the US for counterterrorism, its leading role in the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and counter-LRA operations in the
Central African Republic (CAR). One hundred US military advisors are supporting
anti-LRA efforts. Accused by United Nations experts of backing the M23 rebels
in the DRC in October, Uganda claimed it could potentially suspend its involvement
in Somalia and LRA operations.