Uganda
In 2008 the government of President Yoweri Museveni and the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) concluded peace talks to end the long-running war in northern
Uganda, but LRA leader Joseph Kony did not sign the final peace accord. Sought
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) on war crimes charges, the LRA leadership
continued to commit serious abuses, preying on civilians in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), to which the LRA relocated in 2006, as well as in Sudan
and the Central African Republic (CAR).
In Karamoja, where the availability of firearms has aggravated cattle-raiding, the
Ugandan army continued a campaign to disarm residents, but in the process
committed human rights violations.
Military and security agencies illegally detained scores of persons seen as government
opponents, held many of them incommunicado, and tortured some of those
suspected of terrorism and treason. Police harassed opposition politicians and
journalists critical of the government, charging some with sedition and defamation.
War in Northern Uganda
At the start of 2008, the government and the LRA appeared to be moving significantly
closer to peace, concluding agreement in February on accountability, reconciliation,
demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration. However, by the end
of the year hopes of a final settlement were fading in the face of the repeated failure
of Joseph Kony to show up to sign the final peace agreement. Meanwhile, LRA
forces continued to commit abuses against civilians outside Uganda.
In an annex to the June 29, 2007 agreement, in February the parties agreed to the
creation of a special division of the Ugandan High Court to try serious crimes
committed during the conflict and broader accountability measures such as a
truth commission, reparations, and traditional justice practices. Judges were
appointed to the special division in May, but little else has been done since then.
As the International Criminal Court’s statute permits national trials of its cases
where certain requirements are satisfied, LRA leaders for whom ICC arrest warrants have been issued could potentially be prosecuted by the Ugandan special
division, although only if the ICC judges determine that the national trials provide
an adequate alternative.
Meanwhile the LRA attacked civilians in the DRC, the CAR, and Sudan. In February
they reportedly abducted at least 100 persons in these three countries. After LRA
combatants killed 26 civilians and abducted 95 in March in Equatoria, Sudan, the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) ended repatriation of Sudanese
refugees from Uganda. From bases in Garamba National Park, DRC, the LRA in
September, October, and November reportedly abducted at least another 100
children, killed several civilians, and looted and burned Congolese villages.
Shortly after, three LRA defectors trying to turn themselves in were killed by the
local community.
Disarmament in Karamoja
As part of a law enforcement campaign initiated in 2006, the army continued
efforts to disarm the population in the impoverished region of Karamoja. Soldiers
reportedly used excessive force, firing on civilians, killing at least six, and on several
occasions torturing and arbitrarily detaining men to compel them to reveal
the location of weapons, though there were fewer incidents than in previous
years. In October the courts martial sentenced four soldiers to 12 years in prison
for the torture and killing of a local village chief in Kotido.
In April the government launched the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and
Development Programme (KIDDP); its success will depend on more effective
access to justice and protection of civilians during disarmament operations.
Extrajudicial Killings, Illegal Detention, and Torture
In 2008 Human Rights Watch documented more than two dozen cases in which
treason and terrorism suspects were allegedly tortured by agents of the Joint Anti-
Terrorism Taskforce (JATT) and the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence. Victims
described being arrested by agents in civilian dress and unmarked cars, especially
at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Kampala in
November 2007. They said they were beaten and tortured with electricity, and had pepper rubbed in their eyes. Some were illegally detained for many months in the
basement of JATT offices or in other irregular places of detention. Most were never
brought before judicial authorities, as required by law.
Judicial Independence and Freedom of Expression
Some officials failed to implement judicial decisions, especially those involving
politically sensitive issues, and used harassment and excessive force to silent
opponents. On May 27, 2008, the Constitutional Court nullified a section in the
Police Act that required police permission to hold a public rally, saying that it
unduly limited the rights to freedom of assembly and association. When the
Democratic Party organized a celebratory public rally in the capital, police officers,
deployed in large numbers, used tear gas and water cannons on the assembled
crowd. After party activists addressed the crowd through loud speakers from
their offices, police officers stormed the building, arresting four people who they
charged with environmental pollution for having used the speakers. Police prevented
the party from using its offices for almost a month. The police asserted
that they retain the right to determine where public rallies take place.
In February, Betty Kamya, a parliamentarian from the Forum for Democratic
Change, (FDC) was questioned by the police and charged with sedition, promoting
sectarianism, inciting violence, and promoting war on the person of the president
for saying that Ugandans should “fight to extricate [themselves] from
Museveni’s paw.” In June, while Conservative Party Parliamentarian Suzan
Nampijja was addressing a rally in her constituency, police used tear gas to disperse
the crowd, giving no reason for their action. A few days later FDC
Parliamentarian Nabillah Naggayi Sempala was accosted while addressing a
crowd at a Kampala market. According to her account, police officers humiliated
her, stripped her of her clothing, and detained her temporarily.
Government officials also harassed opponents of a controversial land bill amendment
presented to parliament in 2008. In July, Medadi Lubega, Peter Mayiga, and
Betty Nambooze Bakireke, officials of the Buganda cultural institution and outspoken
critics of the bill, were arrested and detained for one week, well beyond
the constitutional limit of 48 hours. The three were subsequently re-arrested and
eventually charged with sedition and released on bail. The case was suspended in August because a 2005 challenge to the Sedition Law, brought by journalists,
was still pending in the Constitutional Court.
Government officials continue to threaten media freedom and use charges such
as sedition, defamation, and inciting violence against critics. In January the
Political and Media Offences Department of the Police charged Andrew Mwenda
and two others with sedition. A group of journalists from The Monitor newspaper
were charged with defaming the inspector general of government, Uganda’s anticorruption
watchdog, for articles written about corruption in her office. Over 20
journalists have pending cases with the police or in the judicial system.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Activists
Police and government officials continue to harass or restrict free expression by
activists supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender rights. Police arrested
three LGBT activists on June 4 at the 2008 HIV/AIDS Implementers meeting in
Kampala after they peacefully protested the lack of official response to HIV/AIDS
among LGBT communities. They were charged with criminal trespass. Later, one
was mistreated by police officers during 24 hours of detention. In August the
three were acquitted of all charges.
In September two other members of the LGBT community were arrested by police
and held without charge for six days. In October Ethics and Integrity Minister
James Nsaba Buturo reaffirmed continued police operations to arrest LGBT individuals.
He said, “the state of moral health in our nation is challenging and we
are concerned about the mushrooming of lesbianism and homosexuality.”
HIV/AIDS
The proposed HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill 2008 criminalizes the “intentional
transmission of HIV & AIDS.” It also establishes compulsory HIV testing for
pregnant women and their partners. In its overall HIV/AIDS strategy, the government
has not made enough effort or provided sufficient resources for prevention
and care services to prevent HIV transmission.
Key International Actors
International donors focused on corruption, but generally shied away from pressing
the government to halt and punish human rights violations perpetrated by
security forces, even those generally known among diplomats such as illegal
detention and torture.
Warrants issued by the ICC for LRA leaders in 2005 remain outstanding. No major
players—including the United States, United Kingdom, the European Union, and
the United Nations—took steps to ensure the apprehension of the suspects,
although the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on EU and African
Union member states and regional countries to help implement the warrants.
The mandate of the special envoy of the UN secretary-general for the LRA-affected
areas, Joaquim Chissano, was renewed for 2008. Throughout his tenure, he has
generally failed to stress the importance of justice for past crimes as a basis for
any durable peace. After his June briefing, UN Security Council members could not
agree on language concerning the ICC and so said nothing, providing one more
example of indecision in promoting justice for the victims of abuses.