Uganda
The State Department report on human rights in Uganda is comprehensive and fairly accurate in detail. At first blush, its flaws appear to be those relatively minor sins of errant emphasis, absent analysis and occasional omission. Were these small errors truly discrete and unrelated, there would be no cause for concern. However, the cumulative effect of these errors is to distort and diminish the existing threat to human rights in Uganda. The shortcomings in the report tend to fall into six areas: 1) electoral and constitutional politics; 2) corruption and the misallocation of scarce government resources; 3) the abuse of the judicial process to stifle dissent; 4) the failure to develop effective mechanisms for the investigation and prosecution of human rights abuses; 5) and inability or unwillingness to curb the excesses of the armed forces; and 6) President Yoweri Museveni's active support for the Rwandan Patriotic Front.
By the end of 1992, Uganda's Constitutional Reform Commission (CRC) had yet to present President Museveni with its draft constitution and its recommendations for the proposed constitution's realization. Since then, the CRC has published its long overdue report. To the surprise of some, and the consternation of many, the CRC has recommended continuing the present suspension of party activities for another five years. In addition, at the end of these five years, a public referendum on the continued suspension will be held. Should the advice of the CRC be heeded, it would mean at least five more years of largely one-party rule. It is a suggestion wholly in keeping
with President Museveni's public pronouncements on the subject.
To his credit, President Museveni has appointed a number of individuals of other political persuasions and parties to relatively important posts in his administration and arranged for a wide variety of ethnic groups to be represented in the National Resistance Council. For example, he has made Democratic Party (DP) Chair Paul Ssemogerere Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Conservative Party (CP) leader Jehoash Mayanja-Nkangi, Minister of Finance and Economic Planning. In addition, he has created locally elected governing institutions known as Resistance Councils (RCs) which handle municipal affairs. The local RCs also elect intermediate resistance councils which govern at increasingly higher and wider regional levels.
However, because the posts held by opposition party members in Museveni's National Resistance Movement (NRM) government do not derive from choices made by the electorate, they are viewed by many as arrangements of convenience and cooption. Michael Kaggwa, chair of a Democratic Party group known as "the Mobilizers" which seeks to defy the ban on party activity, has said that while "Obote wanted to kill political parties by violence, Museveni, being a tactician, wants to kill them by kindness -- by giving us ministerial posts." It is therefore difficult to categorize Museveni's selective attempts at representative government as democratic. Despite the surface diversity of his ruling government, the
395
Uganda
allegedly "opposing" politicians serve at Museveni's pleasure, and do not provide the kind of challenge to policies which a "loyal" party opposition is apt to provide.
While the report correctly notes that "there are no meaningful checks and balances" on [Museveni's] presidential power," it should have also noted a further manifestation of this fact. President Museveni is in addition to the posts mentioned by the report also the chairman of the National Resistance Council (NRC), the legislative body of the interim government. Under his direction, the NRC has held closed sessions at which important issues, such as political party activity, have been considered. Such secret sessions limits the ability of the public to be informed about and participate in government and should have been noted in the report.
Until very recently, President Museveni has refused to rethink his apparently self-serving commitment to no-party politics. His argument for universal suffrage without party activity, party slates or party identification generally runs as follows. Multiparty politics is a luxury which can only be afforded by societies which have reached a certain level of social and economic development; development is identified with relatively efficient markets and financial institutions and a semi-independent civil society possessing a complex array of culture-bearing institutions. Since Uganda does not have the kind of civil society which provides the mechanisms which dampen and mediate conflict, Museveni asserts that party politics would dissolve into ethnic and religious warfare. The historical experience of political party activity,
and the loss of close to 800,000 Ugandan lives during the Amin and Obote regimes invariably provide the final pieces of empirical proof in the argument against multiparty democracy.
There seems to be some popular support for maintaining the ban on full-scale multiparty politicking. Though public opinion on this matter is rather fluid, in at least one poll and the CRC report, multiparty politics is identified by the public with ethnic and religious strife. Understandably, Ugandan citizens place greater weight on the relative political coherence and stability realized under the NRM's one-party rule.
Despite the citizenry's wariness, there is still considerable party activity throughout Uganda. Political parties are not fully banned -- they are simply not permitted to engage in the whole range of activities normally associated with political parties. Indeed, the persistent strength, viability and grass roots support for the parties despite the restrictions is reflected in Democratic Party's and the Uganda Peoples Congress' (UPC) refusals to abide by the limitations on party activity.
More importantly, however, even if the elections to the constituent assembly are held on a no-party basis, Museveni has recently recognized - and appears resigned to -- the fact that campaigning will effectively take place along party lines. In almost every electoral district, the voters will assuredly be aware of whether the particular candidate supports multiparty or no-party politics. In addition, the voters will also know which of the traditional parties -- the DP, CP or UPC --the candidates supporting multiparty
396
Uganda
politics represent. Thus, despite the CRC's recommendations, the NRM's political preferences, and the electorate's hesitancy, the election for the constituent assembly will turn out to be a plebiscite on multiparty politics.
The issue of official corruption in Uganda is an important concern not addressed in the report. While few Ugandans are willing to impugn President Museveni's integrity, there is widespread discontent regarding corruption by his cabinet ministers, senior civil servants and heads of government parastatals. The president has not appeared to be especially interested in curbing, let alone eliminating, graft. For example, despite sacking his defense minister, Major General David Tinyefuza, after Amnesty International levelled charges of massive human rights abuse at the NRM government for the brutal manner in which the army conducted its counter-insurgency operations in the north, Museveni allowed Tinyefuza to keep a relatively important position in the government after being relieved of his ministry. Similarly, Vice President Samuel Kisseka has been kept on despite frequent allegations of corruption. Their continued presence in government ~ along with the absence of efforts to curb corruption - has led to charges that President Museveni is more concerned with consolidating and maintaining his power base, than he is with good government.
Good government is also difficult to effect when, as the World Bank estimates, some 53% of government spending goes to the military. Without citing figures, the State Department asserts that the Ugandan government has substantial-
ly reduced its military expenditures. Given the secrecy surrounding both the number of persons in the military and the size of its budget, the report appears to be privy to information not available elsewhere. Regardless of the exact numbers, however, other branches of the public sector, such as the judiciary, the Human Rights Commission and the Inspector General of Government remain so woefully underfunded that they cannot fully execute their responsibilities and therefore cannot provide a meaningful check on either military abuse or government corruption.
The State Department identifies significant government abuse of its prosecutorial prerogative with respect to both journalists and opposition party leaders. Yet despite this recognition, the report ignores the pervasive chilling effect such arrests on "spurious" charges have on both the press and the opposition. It prefers to emphasize the "wide range of viewpoints" reflected in the press and the "open debate" which occurs in the NRC and other public forums.
The report accurately, if not exhaustively, chronicles the numerous detentions and imprisonments of journalists on trumped-up charges ranging from treason to sedition to defamation. It describes the arrest and death of Mark Too, the defamation suit lost by Teddy Cheeye of Uganda Confidential, as well as the arrests of Saul Katabarwa of Guide and John Kyeyune of the Citizen. Its omissions include the charging of Charles Ocan -- editor of the Iteso language daily ETOP -- with criminal defamation. Though the charges against Ocan were later dropped, his movements were re-
397
Uganda
stricted and he continued to be intimidated by the police. The report also fails to mention the arrests of Kakooza Mutale of Economy and M. Louie of Mulungera, as well as the questioning of William Pike and Didas Bakunzi of the New Vision following the publication of an article on the release of 400 Muslim youths from Luzira Prison. While no papers or magazines have been shut down, these individual actions against journalists have resulted in a significant amount of self-censorship on the part of the press and can hardly be said to be consistent with the principles of an open society.
In addition to its abuse of the judicial process with respect to the fourth estate, the NRM government also arrested numerous opposition leaders on contrived charges of treason. Secretary-General of the DP, Robert Kitariko, and party publicity secretary, Ojok Mulozi, were arrested on January 13 and charged with treason. They were released later in the year. Cecilia Ogwal, de facto leader of the UPC, and some 14 other party officials, were arrested on January 21. They were detained, but not charged. More egregious, however, was treatment of some 18 government officials from the north arrested on treason charges in May 1991. The arrested included former Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Daniel Atubo, and members of Parliament Zachary Olum and Irene Julu. In January 1992, the government released 14 of the 18. Atubo was forced to wait until May to be acquitted of sedition charges. And in August, after 15 months in prison, the charges against Olum and Julu were finally dropped.
The case of Olum and Julu points up
the coercive powers the government may bring to bear on politicians who are deemed to have stepped out of line. Under Ugandan law, if a person is charged with a capital offense like treason, he or she may be held without trial for up to 480 days. This blatantly violates Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the State Department should have condemned this practice. Olum and Julu were held for the full measure -- and then released without trial. Their 15-month term of imprisonment -- their period of detention without trial cannot legitimately be called anything else -- serves as a clear warning to other officials and politicians of the dangers of public criticism and any political action the government might deem threatening.
The report should have indicated as well that the use of treason charges as a holding charge is not limited to political opponents, but has also been used -against persons whose possible offenses have little connection to treason, such as Karimojong cattle rustlers and civilians caught in the crossfire of counter-insurgency operations.
The report recognizes that despite promises by President Museveni that his government would be committed to human rights, none of the institutions with jurisdiction over human rights issues has as yet published its findings. The biggest failure is the Human Rights Commission (HRC). The HRC was designed to investigate human rights abuses from 1962 to the present and to develop mechanisms to prevent the recurrence of Uganda's multiple and varied human rights tragedies. Its efforts have been wholly com-
398
Uganda
promised and undermined by the government that created it. Moreover, in 1992 funding for the HRC was only 20% of original levels. Without adequate funds, the HRC has been unable to produce a single report. Without a report, there have been no prosecutions. Ironically, the government says that its refusal to create a permanent human rights body is a function of the failure of the HRC to produce a report.
Though his mandate to investigate human rights abuses is not as broad as the HRC's, the Inspector General of Government (IGG) has concurrent jurisdiction with the HRC to look into post-1986 abuses. His output, however, is equally dismal. The sole report issued by the IGG merely repeated criticisms made by Amnesty International of Defence Minister David Tinyefuza. While these criticisms led to Tinyefuza's dismissal, the IGG's report was widely believed to have been an attempt to preempt judicial criticism of both the government's attempt to charge 18 government officials with treason and the ill-treatment of the 18 while in detention. Moreover, despite Tinyefuza's dismissal, he continues to wield significant influence both in relation to the presidency as well as the army.
It is also worth noting that while the report mentions the sacking of Deputy IGG Lule, it fails to discuss his replacement, one-time Inspector General of Police Psomgen. Psomgen was dismissed by Museveni from his previous post in 1990, after police killed two student protesters at Makerere University. A commission of inquiry was established after the killings, but, to date, its findings have not been made public.
The dismissal of Lule and his replacement by Psomgen sends two ominous signals. First, Lule's dismissal suggests that the government is not ready to permit serious criticism of its human rights performance. Second, the appointment of a police official accused, but never cleared, of human rights violations to one of Uganda's most important human rights advocacy positions suggests that Museveni views the commitment to human rights with a great deal of cynicism, if not contempt.
The report notes that in early November, the government set up a "human rights desk" within the Ministry of Justice, but fails to assess its significance, if any. The "desk" is intended to field queries from within and without the country and prepare periodic national human rights reports and will share responsibility for hearing and investigating complaints of human rights abuses with the IGG. In light of the failings of the HRC and the IGG, the creation of another human rights ombudsman has been met with significant and justified skepticism, particularly given a lack of clearly defined duties, bureaucratic infrastructure and funding.
Although the report catalogues the full panoply of abuses engaged in by the National Resistance Army (NRA), and acknowledges widespread criticism of President Museveni for his unwillingness to reign in the NRA, it undercuts much of the force of its criticism by suggesting that 1992 saw a significant improvement in behavior by the NRA. While the decrease in counter-insurgency operations in the north seems to have resulted in a comparable decrease in the number of reported human rights abuses, the perva-
399
Uganda
siveness and institutionalized character of the abuse led to a scathing September Amnesty International report which describes in great detail a pattern of "deliberate and cynical violations of human rights by high-ranking military and government officials." Amnesty expressed particular concern about the culture of indiscriminate violence cultivated and reinforced by NRA officers in the suppression of revolts in the north and east, the use of torture as a normal part of the imprisonment of rebel soldiers, the mass trials of allegedly treasonous NRA soldiers ~ and the concomitant abuse of procedure -- and the summary execution of NRA soldiers found guilty of abuses. These events receive but passing mention by the State Department.
As previously mentioned, in response to the Amnesty criticism, President Museveni relieved Major General Tinyefuza of his command and his ministry. Aside from this largely cosmetic move, the limited changes in the NRA do not seem to constitute significant progress and provide shaky grounds for the State Department's admittedly muted optimism. The culture of impunity and institutional practice of the NRA remain untouched and pose a real threat to human rights practices should hostilities intensify.
The report mentions that the Ugandan government has been accused of supporting the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF). It also mentions that many RPF rebels are former NRA members. However, the report then goes on to say that Uganda is playing a constructive role in negotiations between the RPF and the Rwandan government, an assertion that ignores the Museveni government's role in aiding and
abetting the civil war in Rwanda for the past four years.
The facts supporting this conclusion are persuasive. The RPF is led by several of Museveni's former senior officers. These same close military colleagues prepared for the RPF invasion of Rwanda on Ugandan soil, and even engaged in a military exercise that involved some 4,000 NRA troops. The RPF continues to use southwest Uganda as a base and receives the better part of its supplies from Uganda. Indeed, President Mitte-rand of France felt that Ugandan involvement in the Rwandan civil war was clear enough to warrant referring the conflict between the two countries to the United Nations.
Finally, a word about the effort in the report's introduction to briefly describe the economic situation in the country. While the intent of this effort is commendable and required by the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports, the references to the economic condition of the Ugandan populace are superficial and grossly misleading. The effects of retrenchment occurring as the result of reforms "supported by the International Monetary Fund" are not limited to civil servants as the report implies, but rather have had a severe, negative impact on all strata of society.
400
