UGANDA
The report on Uganda presents a fairly accurate portrayal of the second year of President Museveni's tenure in office. It correctly states that the National Resistance Movement (NRM) has been successful in establishing firm authority in the areas that are not plagued by guerrilla activity, and points to the introduction of a number of reforms to enhance the protection of human rights. However, the report tends to understate the nature and the gravity of the problems that remain unresolved, and fails to relate them to the human rights situation in the country over the past year.
The report fails to point out that the NRM has not vigorously sought a political solution to the turmoil that has plagued the country since the overthrow of Idi Amin in 1979. This has had a major detrimental impact on the status of human rights in Uganda today. Throughout 1987, some senior government officials declared their intention to "crush", "liquidate" or "destroy" the rebels militarily, rather than to seek an alternative means of settling the dispute. While it is true, as the report notes, that the Government extended an amnesty to all rebels who agreed to surrender, this initiative, while welcome, has not been accompanied by a sustained effort to address the basis of the deep-rooted political conflicts raging in Uganda.
Although the report correctly states that the NRM "has promised that a new constitution will be drafted and presented to Ugandans for approval," it does not mention that the discussion of constitutional issues is off-limits for the media and for the general public. The report also fails to make clear the extent to which NRM intransigence has contributed significantly to the continuing impasse and the resultant abuses in the northern and northeastern parts of the country. Because of this omission, the report tends to use exculpatory language in its description of human rights abuses committed by the National Resistance Army (NRA). The report notes that the once-disciplined NRA has "absorbed soldiers from previous regies and recruited those who did not fight for the
159
Critique
NRA's goals before its assumption of power," but that only partially explains the current deterioration in morale and discipline among the troops. Nor can human rights abuses be attributed principally to "NRA deserters." Much of the rise in abuses should be attributed to the transformation of the NRA into a regular army faced by an insurgency, which has required the use of tactics that would have been counter-productive for a guerrilla organization (such as the NRA was) that needed the support of the local populace. This evolution should not be used as a pretext to excuse violations committed by the NRA, but rather as a basis for condemning abusive practices.
The report provides generally accurate information concerning torture in Uganda. It mentions reports "early in 1987" of the continued use of the practice of three-piece tying. However, despite official renunciation of the practice, which the State Department notes, reports continued to surface throughout 1987 of its use by military authorities. The report correctly states that five military personnel were convicted of capital offenses by the military tribunal. To our knowledge, however, prosecutions have not been brought against those responsible for torture perse.
The section on arbitrary arrest does not discuss, as it should, the use of unofficial incarceration centers — as distinct from the military prisons that the report describes. These include Basiima House, near Lubiiri Barracks, the headquarters of military intelligence, where several prominent people are held. Many similar centers are reported to exist elsewhere, especially in the north and the east. The section also omits reference to the number of extralegal detainees — "lodgers" in local parlance — to whom there is only passing reference. We estimate that there are between 4,000-5,000 such detainees, most held in the three men's prisons of Luzira compound, outside Kampala.
The report describes the detention without charge of human-rights activist Lance Seera Muwanga, released on grounds of ill health in March 1988. It fails to mention a disturbing aspect to his incarceration that emerged in 1987. During a "Meet the Press" interview with Radio France Internationale in Paris on October 24,1987, President Museveni stated that Muwanga had worked at the State Research Bureau, notorious for torture during the rule of Idi Amin. These charges added a grave dimension to the Muwanga case and can be viewed
160
Uganda
as an attempt to justify, retroactively, Muwanga's unlawful detention. Also in the section on arbitrary arrest and detention, there is a reference to a 1987 report by Amnesty International listing 50 political detainees held wthout charge. The country report should have stated clearly that this list was merely a sample, and not an exhaustive list of all such detainees.
The country report should have referred to the arrest, on political grounds, in December 1987 of Professor Charles Kagenda-Atwooki, a senior official of the Uganda People's Congress (UPC). Although the exact reason for his arrest is not clear, he was arrested after he participated in a BBC broadcast about human rights issues.
The section of the report covering press freedom fails to take note of significant developments. Although the press in Uganda is one of the least inhibited in the region, there were several troubling developments in 1987:
•	The report correctly states that the government has censored only one newspaper. However, by mid-1987 many newspaper editors had been severely criticized by a number of government officials. A broad range of subjects were off-limits to the press: the Presidency; the war in the north; matters of a constitutional nature; and the state of the economy. For example, news reports on the war in the north reached a peak around mid-1987, alleging abuses by the NRA and criticizing the hardline attitude of the government towards the insurgency. A warning by the President that journalists who "misrepresent" the situation in the north would be liable to detention without trial led to a restriction of coverage so that it is now based solely on official releases from NRA headquarters. Lance Muwanga's detention was partly triggered by the government's intolerance of criticism of army behavior. In issuing Muwanga's detention order. President Museveni declared that he would not permit the press "to denigrate the army."
•	The report does not mention the arrest, at the end of December 1987, of John Kakooza, editor of The Citizen, following an article in which he stated that the rebels were in control of substantial parts of the country. The article also contained political commentary on the rebel group led by Alice Lakwena, whose soldiers were known as the Holy Spirit Battalion and who claimed to have been appointed by God to overthrow Museveni. Kakooza was arrested on charges of sedition and released on bail.
161
Critique
•	The report should also have mentioned the arrest at the end of 1987 of Francis Odida, editor of the Sunday Review, on the basis of a story he wrote in October about the Lakwena affair. Odida was initially charged with sedition and then treason, which means he is not eligible for bail. He remains in detention.
•	Followii^ critical reports of tension between Kenya and Uganda in December, the Minister of Information threatened to limit the freedom of newspapers to report on relations between the two countries. When the media ignored this threat, newspaper editors were summoned by the Minister of Internal Affairs and told to heed the warning. Thereafter, newspapers significantly toned down their criticism of the Kenyan government.
The report does take note of a marked decline in public discussion of national issues, especially during the latter part of 1987. While it refers to the seizure of The Activist magazine in July 1987, it does not mention that in a letter to the Uganda Himian Rights Activists (UHRA) dated July 7, the Prime Minister abruptly prohibited the holding of a loi^-scheduled regional seminar on constitutional issues. The letter was delivered one day before the seminar was due to begin on July 27, forcing the organizers to turn away participants from the conference hall.
The report makes several assertions that are incorrect. It estimates the police force to number about 4,000. We believe that the actual number is closer to 7,000. The references to the Commission on Human Rights do not indicate clearly its mandate, which is to investigate past abuses and not violations which have taken place since the NRM came to power in January 1986. The report states that "[tjhe Commission plans to spend 2 years collecting evidence for the Attorney General." This is not strictly correct. The Commission was not set up to investigate particular cases, but to examine a broad range of violations about which they will then submit recommendations to the government.
Since the report itself states that the motives behind the murder of former Energy Minister Andrew Kajiira are unclear, and does not refer to evidence that his killing was a political act, it is misleading to include this case in the section on "Political Killings."
162
Uganda
The report states that "there were reports of a few children as young as 12 years old being held in some prisons." According to our information, there are more than 200, some of them as young as eight or nine years old.
In the section on the denial of fair public trials, the report states that eight of the prominent figures arrested in October 1986 were cleared of treason. It would be more accurate to say that the charges of treason were dropped. In the same section, the report states that in military tribunals, "any soldier accused of a capital offense must be assigned counsel." This is incorrect. The NRA Code of Conduct does not contain any such provision. In practice, any soldier who is tried below the general court martial is not entitled to counsel.
The section on the investigation of alleged violations of human rights should have mentioned the establishment of the Office of Inspector General of Government, which has the task of investigating corruption, monitoring the conduct of government officials, and examining current abuses of human rights.
The section on discrimination incorrectly states that the Banyrawan-da, as well as the Karamojong, have been subjected to discrimination in social and economic services and have been expelled from, and displaced wthin, Uganda. Many Ugandans have in fact accused the government of favoring the Banyrawanda, especially as recruits for the army, to the point that the NRA is jokingly referred to as the "National Rwandese Army."
163
Critique
