 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni and his National Resistance Movement (NRM) contin-
 ued to rule Uganda through the acting parliament known as the National Resist-
 ance Council (NRC) and a Cabinet since taking power in 1986. The President domi-
 nated the Government, the NRC, and the extended transition process to constitu-
 tional government. The Constituent Assembly (CA), elected in March 1994, corn-
 
 
 pleted its work in August and the new Constitution was promulgated in October
 1995. The Constitution formally extended the one-party state under the NRM for
 an additional 5 years, with a referendum in the fourth year on whether Uganda
 should adopt a multiparty system. Elections for the first Parliament and President
 under the new Constitution were postponed until 1996. The judiciary is generally
 independent.
 Following the promulgation of the Constitution, the army (formerly the National
 Resistance Army) was renamed the Uganda People's Defense Force (UPDF) and
 placed under direct civilian authority. The UPDF remains the key internal and ex-
 ternal security force. In a phased demobilization program, the UPDF reduced its
 numbers from 90,000 in 1990 to approximately 50,000 in 1995. The army, along
 with local defense units (LDU's) assists the police in rural areas. The LDU's contin-
 ued to operate without a clear legal mandate. The army also continued to use
 homeguard forces to help counter insurgent activities in northern Uganda. At mid-
 year the army revamped the homeguard policy to put the force more directly under
 UPDF control. At year's end, the Internal Security Organization (ISO) remained
 under the authority of the President, and although primarily an intelligence-gather-
 ing body, the ISO also has the power to arrest and detain people. The police, the
 UPDF, and LDU's committed human rights abuses. Two rebel groups increased the
 number and intensity of their attacks against the Government and civilians in the
 northern part of the country. Assisted by Sudan, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
 under Joseph Kony carried out larger scale operations than in the past. In the
 northwest, the West Nile Bank Front under Col. Juma Oris began laying landmines
 on roads in July. Both the LRA and the West Nile Bank Front committed human
 rights abuses.
 Primarily based on agriculture, the economy showed strong growth-about 10 per-
 cent-in 1994-95. Coffee remained the chief export crop and foreign exchange earn-
 er, but modest increases in tobacco, cotton, and tea exports also contributed to the
 improved outlook. In the face of massive rural poverty and an estimated gross na-
 tional product of $185 per capita, the Government continued to implement a tough
 economic reform program. Uganda also continued to depend heavily on foreign aid,
 which amounted to a pproximately 50 percent of government spending in 1994-95.
 The Government's human rights record improved incrementally, but numerous,
 serious problems remain. Citizens will not be able to exercise the right to change
 their government until presidential and parliamentary elections are held in 1996.
 The new Constitution extended previously existing restrictions on political party ac-
 tivities for an additional 5 years, effectively limiting freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation. The Government continued to restrict freedom of speech and of the press
 through outdated sedition laws and the detention of journalists, as well as by adopt-
 ing a press law that stipulates licensing of journalists and a censorship board. Police
 and LDU's sometimes tortured criminal suspects, particularly upon arrest. Beatings
 during arrest or interrogation were also common. In a marked improvement over
 previous years, there were fewer reports of abuses against civilians by the UPDF
 in its counter-insurgency operations. The Government took measures to improve the
 discipline and training of security forces, and in some instances punished security
 officials. Despite these efforts, police discipline remained a problem. Prison condi-
 tions remain harsh. Prolonged detention continues, although the Government took
 steps to address the problem. Discrimination against women, domestic violence, and
 the rape of women and children remain serious problems.
 The LRA repeatedly carried out egregious violations of human rights, including
 the murder, rape, mutilation and abduction of hundreds of civilians. In April the
 LRA massacred over 200 civilians in Atiak. The West Nile Bank Front also commit-
 ted serious human rights abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no repoits of politically
 tareted killings.
 There were a few reported incidents in which police, UPDF, and LDU personnel
 killed criminal suspects, sometimes after torturing them. In July LDU officers shot
 and killed a secondary school student in police custody in Mityana. In April in
 Kabarole district, credible reports indicate that Charles Byalega died in detention,
 after being tortured by UPDF officials. Police initiated an investigation of the
 Mityana case, and the UPDF reportedly investigated the Byalega case, but the re-
 sults were not made public. Police also killed one person during a strike at the
 Lugazi Sugar Corporation in June (see Section 6.a.); one officer was charged with
 murder in connection with the incident.
 
 
 Both the UPDF and insurgent forces committed a number of extrajudicial killings
 (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 UPDF officials and police commonly beat and sometimes tortured suspected crimi-
 nals, usually at the time of arrest or interrogation, often for the purpose of forcing
 confessions. LDU's more often than police are accused of such mistreatment of pris-
 oners and detainees. Although LDU's have no training or legal authority to make
 arrests, they continued to do so in rural areas. The Government investigated some
 cases and tried and punished some offenders.
 There were instances of mobs attacking suspected thieves and other offenders
 caught committing crimes. These mobs engaged in stoning, beatings, and other
 forms of mistreatment, such as tying the suspect's wrists and ankles together be-
 hind the back. The authorities rarely prosecuted persons engaged in administering
 mob justice.
 Prison conditions remain harsh, due primarily to lack of funds. Uganda maintains
 two civilian prison systems: one state-funded and run by the Ministry of Internal
 Affairs, and a second rural-based system under the Ministry of Local Government.
 Conditions are particularly harsh in the 133 local prisons which receive no central
 government funding. Although the law states that civilians are not to be held in
 military barracks, some civilians were held in military prisons. Both civilian and
 military prisons have a very high mortality rate from overcrowding, diseases spread
 by unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and AIDS, a disease which is pandemic
 among the general population. Some juveniles are kept in prison with adults.
 Women have segregated wings in the prisons, with female staff, and rape does not
 appearto be a problem among female prisoners.
 Pretrial detainees comprise over one-half of the prison population. In July, of a
 total of approximately 11,000 prisoners in the central system, 4,000 had been con-
 victed, and 7,000 were in pretrial detention. The average time in pretrial detention
 has declined, however, from about 5 years in 1993 to about 2 years in 1995. The
 Government has addressed the problem of lengthy detention by creating District
 Committees to review the cases of all prisoners to expedite their trials. It has also
 begun a 3-year program to repair prison facilities, water and sanitation systems,
 and has increased the budgetary allocations for food and uniforms.
 The Government permitted full access to prisons by the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) and local nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), prin-
 cipally the Foundation for Human Rights Initiatives (FHRI). Prison authorities re-
 quire advance notification of visits, a process that is often subject to administrative
 delays.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under the law, a suspect must be
 charged within 24 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or released on bail within
 240 days (480 days for a capital offense). The authorities enforced neither require-
 ment. Other extant laws, such as the Public Order and Security Act of 1967 (the
 Detention Order), provide for unlimited detention without charge, but these laws
 have never been invoked by the NRM Government. Legal and human rights groups
 sharply criticized the excessive length of detention without trial, in many cases
 amounting to several years. Acknowledging the problem, the Constituent Assembly
 reduced the length of detention to a maximum of 120 days (360 days for a capital
 offense) in the new Constitution.
 The exact number of political detainees and prisoners is not known. One of the
 largest such groups was 130 people detained by the UPDF and police at Gulu, al-
 though this group is known to have included military discipline cases. By year's end,
 less than 20 political detainees remained among the prisoners at Gulu with the
 other political detainees having been released. The ICRC was allowed access to the
 Gulu detainees, although during the last 4 months of the year there was a delay
 in the Government's granting of permission for a visit.
 The Government    so  etainedthree journalists, one of whom died and two of
 whom were charged with sedition (see Section 2.a.).
 Approximately 300 former captives of the LRA (all civilians) voluntarily remain
 in a camp run by international NGO's.
 The Government does not use exile as a mean of political control. A presidential
 amnesty for former rebels remains in effect although those who return may be pros-
 ecuted for criminal acts they may have committed in the past. Several prominent
 Ugandans returned from exile in 1995, including Mustafa Idrissa, Vice President
 under Idi Amin; Masette Kuuya, Picho Owiny and Aliro Omara, former ministers
 under the second Obote government; and Colonel Gad Wilson Toko, former Vice
 President of the Military Council in 1980.
 
 
 282
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tral.-While the judiciary is generally independent, the
 President has extensive legal powers, including the power to appoint the four mem-
 bers of the Judicial Service Commission which makes recommendations on High
 Court and Supreme Court appointments. The commission must concur in the dis-
 missal of a magistrate. Under the new Constitution, Parliament will approve the ap-
 pointment of the members of the Judicial Service Commission.
 The court system consists of magistrates' courts, the High Court, and a Supreme
 Court. The new Constitution, promulgated in October, added a Court of Appeal but
 at year's end it had not been established. The military maintains an independent
 system of courts-martial for military offenders.
 In addition to the regular court system, the local village councils have the author-
 ity to settle civil disputes, including land ownership and payment of debts. These
 courts, often the only ones available to villagers, frequently exceed their authority
 by hearing criminal cases, including murder and rape. Council decisions may be ap-
 pealed in magistrates courts, but often there are no records made of the case at the
 village level, and many defendants are not aware of their right to appeal. The civil-
 ian judicial system contains procedural safeguards, including the granting of bail
 and appeals to higher courts. The right to a fair trial has been circumscribed in re-
 cent years by an inadequate system of judicial administration and resources result-
 ing in a serious backlog of cases. Criminal cases may take 2 years or more to reach
 the courts. The Kampala High Court's efficiency improved, as it heard as many
 cases as possible to alleviate delays. The Buganda Road Court began dismissing
 cases after 6 months if prosecutors were unable to compile sufficient evidence for
 trial setting an example for other courts. Many defendants cannot afford legal coun-
 sel. he Government provides attorneys for indigent defendants only for capital of-
 fenses. The Uganda Law Societ (ULS) operates le al aid clmics in four regional of-
 fices and assists military defendants as well as civilians.
 The military court system does not assure the right to a fair trial. Although the
 accused has the right to legal counsel, military defense attorneys are often un-
 trained and may be assigned by the military command, which also appoints the
 prosecutor and the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military court,
 Which may invoke the death penalty, may be appealed to the high command, but
 not to the High or Supreme Courts. The UIS petitioned the Government to address
 the lack of an appeals process in military courts but received no response. The UIS
 gave the Government notice of its intent to pursue litigation on the issue in August.
 For the first time in several years, the Government arrested and charged persons
 with treason. In the past, numerous human rights abuses were committed in con-
 nection with treason cases, including political detention, detention without charge,
 and mistreatment of prisoners. Durng the year, the Government charged at least
 74 people with treason and related crimes. Of the 74 people formally charged with
 treason, 63 were accused of attempting to overthrow the Government by establish-
 ing a rebel training camp in Buseruka and ferrying arms to western Uganda (see
 Section 1.g.). Fifty-eight of the 63 were arrested and charged on August 3. Two
 UPDF soldiers were charged with treason on May 29. Two other UPDF soldiers
 were charged with treason and terrorism on July 21, as was businessman Salim
 Okulla. Joseph Lusse, a prominent Kampala businessman, was charged with trea-
 son on May 9. Francis Kilama, a radio telephone operator with Uganda National
 Parks, was charged with treason on June 2. At year's end, the cases had not yet
 been brought to trial.
 The number of political prisoners is unknown. The courts continued to process the
 appeals in approximately eight cases of past politically motivated treason convic-
 tions. In March Lieutenant Colonel Ahmed Kashillingi, a former UPDF officer
 charged with treason, was acquitted by the High Court. Willy Mukama, Willy
 Logoko, and Sheik Kinyiri, who were convicted of treason in 1989, completed their
 prison sentences and were released in March. In May the Supreme Court upheld
 the death sentence of Bright Gabula Africa, who was convicted of treason in 1993
 for plotting to overthrow the Government between 1987 and 1990.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government does not generally intrude in the privacy, family, or home of citizens.
 Prison officials routinely censor the mail of prisoners. The law requires that the po-
 lice have search warrants before entering private homes or offices, and the police
 generally observed this law in practice. However, the police sometimes improperly
 searched homes and vehicles without prior warrants.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flict.-With an increase in insurgent activity, reports of violations of humanitarian
 law increased dramatically compared to previous years. Rebel groups committed a
 greater number of abuses and on a larger scale than those committed by govern-
 ment forces.
 
 
 In February in Buseruka, Hoima district, the UPDF pursued a group of rebels
 who had killed two officers in an attack on a police station. In the ensuing engage-
 ment at the rebels' camp, credible reports indicate that the UPDF used excessive
 force and killed at least 92 rebels. Local authorities later arrested other members
 of the group, who had escaped from the camp with rifles and grenades. The Govern-
 ment completed an investigation into the incident, but did not make the results pub-
 lic. In April and May, police and the Internal Security Organization were successful
 in breaking up the National Democratic Alliance, led by former army major Herbert
 Itongwa. The group had kidnaped the Minister of Health in March and assassinated
 a police commandr in February. According to a government spokesperson, the ma-
 jority of the group's 16 members were either arrested or killed during a series of
 armed confrontations between the police, LDU's, and the UPDF. At year's end,
 Itngwa was still at large, but four members of the group were arrested. In Decem-
 ber three were chared with plotting to overtrw the Government and remained
 in reandinLi          n at the end of 1995.
 In north-central Uganda, the Lord's Resistance Army, an insurgent group under
 the leadership of Joseph Kony, continued to kill, maim, rape, and abduct large num-
 bers of civilians. They terrorized civilians with tactics that included cutting off noses
 and ears and breaking legs with hammers. In April approximately 250 soldiers of
 the LRA attacked the villages of Lokung and Atiak and massacred over 200 villag-
 ers. They also destroyed 360 homes and abducted more than one 100 children. In
 July and August, in a series of raids throughout the district of Kitgum, about 500
 LRA rebels abducted hundreds of young people, some, at least, reportedly to be trad-
 ed as slaves for weapons in Sudan. LRA rebels planted landmines on roads in Gulu
 and Kitgum District throughout the year, killing and wounding dozens of civilians.
 Mines on the few roads to the border hinder the transport of food to more than
 100,000 Sudanese refugees and displaced persons in camps near the border.
 In the northwestern region borderg Sudan and Zaire, a new insurgent group,
 the West Nile Bank Front under Juma Oris, laid landmines on major roads used
 for relief shipments to refugee camps as well as for local commerce.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, but the Government restricts these rights in practice. Open debate
 occurred in the CA and the NRC, as well as in most public forums. However, follow-
 ing the outbreak of violence at a rally in a suburb of Kampala, the Ministry of Inter-
 nal Affairs issued a series of assembly guidelines in July, restricting the ability of
 CA delegates to speak outside their constituencies. Police and local officials subse-
 quently cancelled over 17 events at which both supporters of the National Resist-
 ance Movement and advocates of a multiparty system were scheduled to speak. In
 July Zubairi Atamvaku, a CA delegate and university lecturer who was sharply crit-
 icalof the Government, fled the country after alleging harassment by government
 security forces.
 The Government continued to detain and charge journalists with sedition, creat-
 ing a climate in which some journalists felt pressure to practice self-censorship. A
 total of 23 newspapers and magazines, including party newspapers, publish a wide
 range of viewpoints covering the political spectrum. Many print media outlets accu-
 rately reported on corruption in government and human rights abuses. The Govern-
 ment controls one televison station and a radio station (Radio Uganda). The number
 of private television and radio stations continued to increase.
 During the year police arrested three journalists, two of which were subsequently
 charged with sedition. In April police arrested Lawrence Kiwanuka, editor of the
 Democratic Party's Citizen, or an article critical of the ISO. He fled to Kenya after
 his release on bail, fearing that he would be arrested for treason for his association
 with rebel leader Major Itongwa, and that his life was in danger. The two colleagues
 who offered surety for Kiwanuka's bail were later arrested and held for a week
 when they were not able to pay the bond. Hussein Musa Njuki, editor of the weekly
 Islamic newsletter "Assalaam," died shortly after his arrest on August 25 before the
 sedition charge could be filed. Njuki was not in good health, anc the shock of the
 arrest may have exacerbated his medical condition. There was no evidence of torture
 or physical abuse by the police. Haruna Kanaabi, editor of the Islamic Shariat news-
 letter, was arrested on the same da as Nuki and charged with sedition. In Septem-
 ber the magistrate denied bail for Kanaabi, citing the flight of Kiwanuka earlier in
 the year. Kanaabi's trial concluded in November, and he was found guilty. He was
 credited with the time already spent in jail, and on December 28, after paying a
 fine of $50 in lieu of an additional year in jail, he was released. Teddy Cheeye, edi-
 tor of the Uganda Confidential, was acquitted in June of 1993 charges of sedition.
 
 
 284
 
 The NRC passed a Press Bill in May after 4 years of debate on various drafts.
 The final legislation, criticized by the media, requires that journalists be licensed
 and meet minimum qualifications, including a university degree. The new law pro-
 vides for a Media Council to monitor and discipline journalists. The law also gives
 the NRC power to suspend newspapers and to deny access to state information.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at Uganda's five public and
 three private universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or
 publication. However, professors appear to exercise caution rather than test the lim-
 its of their academic freedom. Students have sponsored wide-ranging political de-
 bates in open forums on campus, although at least one student-sponsored seminar
 was blocked by local police in Rakai district in July.
 The Government requires many students and government officials to take NRM
 political education and military science courses known as "Chaka Mchaka." These
 courses have been criticized because they seek to indoctrinate officials in NRM posi-
 tions, including the view that political parties were responsible for Uganda's civil
 conflicts before 1986. There were unconfirmed reports that the techniques used in
 some of the courses included intimidation, physical and mental abuse, and sexual
 harassment.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts
 these freedoms despite constitutional guarantees. The CA maintained in the new
 Constitution existing restrictions on political party activity to continue through the
 next general elections and a 5-year extension of the "movement system" of govern-
 ment. While the movement system is in power, political parties are not permitted
 to hold rallies or sponsor candidates, nor are they allowed to hold national conven-
 tions of their membership or open branch offices outside the capital.
 The Government arbitrarily limits peaceful assembly by denying permits for pub-
 lic gatherings and barring rallies by opposition politicians. The police issue adminis-
 trative permits for public gatherings, but have the right to deny permits in the in-
 terest of public safety. The police prevented or dispersed at least 13 rallies, semi-
 nars, and other public events organized by opposition leaders, including Democratic
 Party President Paul Ssemogeere, Uganda People's Congress Acting Secretary Gen-
 eral Cecilia Ogwal, the newly organized National Freedom Party, and profederalist
 activists.
 NGO's are required to register with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. While the
 Government generally approves NGO registration, it delayed registering the Na-
 tional Organization for Civic Education and Monitoring for two years. This umbrella
 group, comprised of 14 NGO's, was formed in 1993 to monitor elections.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spocts them in practice. A married woman needs her husband's signature on her
 passport application if children are traveling on the mothers passport.
 The Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no reports of
 forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Uganda accommodates over 346,800 refugees from Sudan, Rwanda, Zaire, and
 other countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government, but will not be
 able to exercise this right until presidential and parliamentary elections are held
 in 1996. The National Resistance Movement Government extended its mandate
 until a new parliament and president are elected.
 The NRM majority in the CA voted to continue the existing NRM restrictions on
 political party activity for at least 5 years under the new Constitution, with a public
 referendum after 4 years to determine whether Uganda should adopt a multiparty
 system (see Section 2.b).
 President Museveni continued to hold power as Chief Executive, Minister of De-
 fense, and Chairman of the National Executive Council. He ruled along with a 48-
 member Cabinet and the National Resistance Council, the acting parliament which
 included both indirectly elected and appointed members. There remained few mean-
 ingful checks and balances on presidential power, the new Constitution provides for
 checks on presidential power by an elected Parliament, however, parliamentary elec-
 tions were not scheduled until 1996. The President has been publicly critical of
 multiparty politics and used his influence within the CA to postpone the establish-
 ment of political parties. In October under pressure to allow open participation in
 
 
 285
 the political processprior to parliamentary and presidential elections, the Govern-
 ment disbanded its Focal Point Committees, which had been organized at the local
 level to promote NRM candidates.
 The Government has encouraged the participation of women in government and
 allocated special seats for women in the NRC and the CA. The new Constitution
 continues to provide for special women's representation in the new Parliament. Al-
 though they remain in the minority, women hold positions of responsibility at all
 levels of government, from the Vice President to local resistance councils. The CA
 had 48 women delegates and there are 39 women's representatives in the NRC.
 There were six women in the Cabinet, including the Vice President.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A variety of human rights groups including the Foundation for Human Rights Ini-
 tiatives (FHRI), a women's legal association (FIDA), and the National Women's Or-
 ganization of Uganda, operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their fimdings on human rights cases. HURINET, the Human Rights Net-
 work, an umbrella organization for nine human rights organizations active in the
 country, began publishing a quarterly human rights newsletter in January. Govern-
 ment officials are generally cooperative and responsive to NGO views, although
 some NGO's complained of periodic harassment by government officials. The Gov-
 ernment allowed access by international human rights NGO's, UNHCR, and the
 ICRC. The new Constitution established a Human Rights Commission as a perma-
 nent independent body with the powers of a court. At year's end, however, members
 of the Commission had not yet been named by the President and approved by Par-
 liament.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on these factors, but the Govern-
 ment does not effectively enforce the law in matters of local or customary discrimi-
 nation against women, children, people with disabilities, or certain ethnic groups.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, is common, and there are no
 laws to protect battered women apart from a general law on assault. Public and law
 enforcement officials view wife beating as a man's prerogative and rarely intervene
 in cases of domestic violence. Women are more likely to sue for divorce than to raise
 assault charges against their husbands while still married. In November the police
 set up a special gender issues desk and trained the first of 60 officers in investiga-
 tive techniques and preventive measures for cases of rape.
 Traditional and widespread discrimination against women continues, especially in
 rural areas. Many customary laws discriminate against women in the areas of adop-
 tion, marriage, divorce, and devolution of property on death. Women may not own
 or inherit property or have custody of their children under customary law. Divorce
 law sets stricter evidentiary standards to prove adultery for women than for men.
 Women cannot sponsor a foreign-born spouse or the children of such a union for citi-
 zenship, whereas foreign women who marry Ugandans and the children of those
 marriages automatically receive citizenship. Women do most of the agricultural
 work but own only 7 percent of the land.
 There are active women's rights groups, including FIDA, Action for Development
 (ACFODE), and the National Women's Organization of Uganda, which promote
 greater awareness of the rights of women and children. FIDA is conducting a 3-year
 project to reform outdated and discriminatory laws.
 Children.-The Government has devoted only limited resources to children's wel-
 fare. The Government introduced a children's bill to consolidate laws relating to
 children to provide for their care, protection, and maintenance, and establish a Fam-
 ily and Children's Court. However, the bill had not been passed by the NRC by
 year's end. The 1991 census put the number of orphaned children at 1.2 million (in
 ganda, children missing one or both parents are considered orphans). The high
 number of orphans is attributed to past civil war and AIDS. Girls and boys have
 equal access to education, but families are more likely to enroll their sons in school
 and to continue supporting their education.
 Child abuse remains a serious problem, particularly rape of young girls known lo-
 cally as "deffiement." Only a small fraction of the cases are reported, especially
 when the perpetrator is a family member. Few cases reach the courts, with convic-
 tion and punishment rare. Corporal punishment is common in some schools. In May
 a teacher and headmistress gave a 9-year-old by 130 strokes of the cane, which
 received extensive media attention and prompted widespread public debate on the
 
 
 issue. The teachers were charged with assault; the court case was still in progress
 at year's end.
 Female genital mutilation which is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical andpsychological health, is not widespread but
 is practiced by some groups in eastern Uganda, notably the Sebei. There is no law
 against the practice. The Government and women's groups are working to stop the
 practice through education.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate accessibility to buildings or
 government services for the disabled. Widespread discrimination by society and em-
 players limits job and educational opportunities for those with physical disabilities.
 A small office within the Ministry of Local Government tries to assist disabled
 Ugandans but lacks sufficient funding.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-There is no single labor code, but a combination of
 laws provides for the right of workers to form unions, and since 1993 this right has
 been extended to civil servants. However, many "essential" government employees
 are still not permitted to form unions; these include the police, army, permanent
 secretaries in the ministries, heads of departments and state-owned enterprises,
 school principals, and other management level officials.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), the largest labor federation,
 includes 15 unions and is independent of the Government and political parties.
 NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains marginal, since about 90 percent
 of the work force consists of peasant farmers. According to the 1988-89 census,
 about 20 percent of an estimated 400,000 workers in the industrial or modern wage
 sector of the economy are unionized. There is almost no unionization in the large
 agricultural sector, much of which is subsistence farming.
 The new Constitution confirmed the right to strike, but government policy re-
 quires that labor and management make every effort to reconcile labor disputes be-
 fore resorting to strike action. If reconciliation is not possible, labor must submit
 its grievances and notice to strike to the Minister of Labor, who under the Trade
 Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act has the option of referring the dispute to
 the Industrial Court. There is no law prohibiting retribution against strikers.
 There were approximately two dozen strikes by both unionized and nonunionized
 labor, including taxi drivers, bankers, teachers, doctors, health care workers, and
 tea and sugar factory workers. The only violent strike occurred in June, when police
 opened fire on striking workers at the Lugazi Sugar Corporation, killing 1 person
 and injuring 10; 1 plice officer was charged with murder following the incident. In
 a landmark court decision, the High Court upheld the Industrial Court's award of
 payment of salary increases dating back to 1993 to employees of six foreign-owned
 anks. Bank employees went on strike in May after bank management refused to
 honor the April decision by the Industrial Court, and again in August following the
 decision of the High Court. Representatives of the bank workers and management
 signed an agreement outlining a 4-year payent schedule for the higher salaries.
 Following a strike by the Uganda Medical Workers Association in September, three
 union leaders were arrested and charged with neglect of duty and disobeying lawful
 orders; they were released on bail. At year's end, the case was pending.
 Labor unions freely exercise the right to affliate with and participate in regional
 and international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 to organize and bargain collectively, but true collective bargaining takes place only
 in the small private sector of the modern economy. In the modern sector, the Gov-
 ernment is by far the largest employer (civil service and state-owned enterprises)
 and it dominates the bargaining process. The Government has, however, adopted a
 tripartite (government-em loyers- abor) cooperative approach to setting wages and
 resolving labor issues. Both the Government and employers may refer disputes to
 the Industrial Court. The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employ-
 ers but there were no reported incidents of government harassment of union offi-
 cials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits compulsory
 labor. However, there is evidence that prison officials force prisoners to work on pri-
 vate farms and construction sites.
 The International Labor Organization cited the government's failure to report on
 the Convention on Forced Labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Employers are prohibited by law
 from employing workers below the age of 18, and there is no child labor in the for-
 meal sector, incuding the export industries. However, many children are employed
 
 
 in the informal sector, often on family subsistence farms, or, in urban areas, selling
 small wares on the streets or working as domestics. The Ministry of Social Services
 is charged with enforcing the law on child labor, but does so only in the industrial
 sector. There are no minimum educational requirements.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Neither the law nor the Government sets an
 explicit minimum wage policy. Wages are set by negotiation between unions and
 employers or by the boards of directors of state-owned industries. Salaries are usu-
 ally combined with other incentives (housing, transport allowance) which often
 equal base wages. The Ministry of Labor's salary scale for civil servants starts with
 unskilled labor earning $44 to $77 per month (40,000 to 70,000 shillings), skilled
 labor (such as clerks or drivers) $55 to $133 per month (50,000 to 120,000 shillings),
 and supervisors $155 to $333 per month (140,000 to 300 000 shillings), all include
 provisions for paid overtime. The higher end of this scae would begin to support
 a family. However, wages in general are insufficient to support a family, and many
 civil servants and other workers must find second jobs, grow their own food, or seek
 other ways to feed their families.
 Although there is no legal maximum workweek, the normal workweek is 40 hours,
 and time and a half is paid for each additional hour worked.
 The only occupational health and safety legislation is contained in the outdated
 Factories Act of 1954, which does not address many present day working hazards.
 The act does not permit workers to excuse themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions without jeopardy to continued employment. The Ministry of Labor's Depart-
 ment of Occupational Health is responsible for enforcement, but in practice inspec-
 tions are rare.
