 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni and his National Resistance Movement (NRM) took
 power in Janusry 1986 after a 6-year guerrilla struggle against the regimes of Mil-
 ton Obote and Tio Okello. Museveni replaced parliamentary structures with an
 unelected interim government headed by the National Resistance Council (NRC).
 Competitive nonparty elections in 1989 expanded the NRC and brought in rep-
 resentatives from all parts of the country. Later that year the transition to civilian
 government promised for 1990 was postponed 5 years on the grounds that the time
 was needed for consultations on a new constitution. The Constitutional Commission
 had not released the draft constitution by the end of 1992. A Constituent Assembly
 is to be elected in 1993 to debate and adopt the constitution, leading to general elec-
 tions in 1994. During the spring and summer of 1992, increasing activity by the
 Democratic Party (DP) and the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC) led the NRC to con-
 sider legislation specifying limits on party activities. President Museveni continues
 to dominate the Government, exercising authority through the NRC, an appointed
 Cabinet, and the National Resistance Army.
 The National Resistance Army (NRA) is the key security apparatus in Uganda
 and remains a significant political force The army was expanded tenfold between
 1986 and 1991, eroding discipline within the ranks. It was again responsible for
 many human rights violations though these diminished in 1992. Human nghts ob-
 servers have been critical of Museveni for his unwillingness to hold the NRA ac-
 countable for human rights violations. In the spring, plans to demobilize up to
 50,000 troops were announced, and the first contingent was discharged during the
 fall. The army, along with home guards and local defense units, performs police
 functions in rural areas. The professionalism of the Ugandan police grew in 1992
 but much of the force remains corrupt, ill-trained, and poorly equipped. The Internal
 Security Organization (ISO) is responsible for intelligence and security. It was not
 implicated in human rights violations in 1992. Total military expenditures for 1989
 the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament AGency conducted
 a detailed analysis, were roughly estimated to be $61.5 million. The Government
 has been substantially reducing its military spending.
 Uganda's economic growth rate slowed to about 4 percent in 1992, as the price
 of coffee (its principal export) remained depressed and government spending was cut
 severely to check inflation which rose to an annualized rate of over 50 percent dur-
 ing the spring. Foreign aid contributed 60 percent of government spending in 1992.
 In accordance with reforms supported by the International Monetary Fund, the civil
 service began a retrenchment which cut the government payroll by some 8,000 out
 of an eventual reduction of 60,000. Despite programs aimed at alleviating rural pov-
 erty, little progress has been made.
 Overall, the human rights situation in Uganda improved over previous years with
 progress towards ratifying a new constitution, with reduced insurgencies in north-
 ern and northeastern Uvanda. and with the beginning of reductions in the size of
 
 
 284
 the NRA. Although not on the scale of 1991, the army and the rebels continued to
 commit human rights abuses, including abduction, killing, and rape of civilians. The
 Government continued to control the pace of political chang. During the year, the
 Government undertook a major reduction in the number ol politica[ and other de-
 tainees and prisoners.
 About 80 prisoners were thought to be awaiting trial in civilian courts for treason
 at the end of 1992; this was a sharp decrease from the previous year. Approximately
 50 soldiers were awaiting court-martial on treason charges. The NRA turned over
 most of its prisoners to civil authorities for prosecution, but about 600 "military"
 prisoners continued to be held by the army at the end of the year, and the army
 continued to arrest and detain civilians, who were denied legal protections and were
 subject to abuse.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There is no evidence that the Ugan-
 dan Government sanctioned political killings in 1992. However, there were credible
 reports that the NRA was again responsible for extrajudicial killings. According to
 the Government, in past years some soldiers have been arrested, tried, and even ex-
 ecuted for such killings. As military trials are not open to public scrutiny, it is im-
 possible to evaluate government claims that incidents of extrajudicial executions are
 properly investigated or that those responsible have been held accountable (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-No government-sponsored disappearances are known to have
 occurred.
 c. Torture and Other Cruet, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 In recent years, most instances of torture have occurred during detention by the
 NRA. During 1992 the NRA often beat suspected rebels when apprehending them
 but seldom maimed or disabled them as it had sometimes done in previous years.
 In at least one case, however, a person arrested by the NRA died as a result of tor-
 ture. In isolated cases, the army practiced 'kandoya," immobilizing prisoners by sus-
 pending them by their wrists and ankles behind their back. Beatings are also ad-
 ministered at police stations.
 Conditions of detention are harsh. Uganda's prisons reportedly have one of the
 highest mortality rates in the world, the result of diseases spread by unsanitary
 conditions, malnutrition, and AIDS. Overpopulation was reduced in some prisons.
 Luzira prison, Uganda's largest, with an intended capacity of 600, held about 1,500
 at the end of 1992, down from more than 2,000 at the beginning of the year. The
 population of Jinja prison fell from 1,000 to only 200 during the same period, due
 to President Museveni's pardon of over 1,500 prisoners nationwide. However,
 unhygienic conditions and shortages of water have led to epidemics of dysentery.
 Water supplies to the prison in Jinja were restored in September after being cut
 off for failure to pay utility bills. Food shortages were exacerbated by drought in
 1992, particularly in the east. In Soroti, the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) intervened to forestall the threat of starvation, and prisoners' families
 were permitted to deliver food to prisons. Some supplies intended or detainees were
 diverted for sale. Prisoners do not have access to proper medical care, partially be-
 cause there is a lack of transport and facilities.
 The ICRC visited 60 to 80 prisons, police stations, military barracks and NRA de-
 tachments throughout Uganda during 1992. Visits to every military barracks and
 most detachments in the country were planned during the year, but some visits
 were held up by administrative difficulties within the NRA. In general, ICRC access
 to civilian and military places of detention is excellent.
 The Inspector General of Government (IGG) visited Luzira prison and most bar-
 racks and police stations in and near Kampala and found no evidence of torture.
 Overcrowding and poor diet were the chief problems identified by the IGG. Planned
 visits to other police stations, prisons, andpbarracks were not carried out for lack
 of logistical support. The visits appeared to be a genuine effort to ensure proper
 treatment of prisoners, but their value was compromised by the fact that they were
 arranged with police and military authorities at least a day in advance.
 In previous years, the African National Congress (ANC) maintained detention
 camps in various countries with the permission of host governments. At these
 camps, ANC     security  personnel tortured, mistreated, and  in some cases
 extrajudicially executed ANC defectors, detainees, and alleged South African gov-
 ernment spies. A 1992 report issued by the ANC Commission of Inquiry includes
 a discussion of Bukoloto, Uganda. The report mentions abuses which occurred in
 previous years at this camp, including "acts of gratutious and random violence per-
 
 
 285
 petrated on the detainees by the camp guards" and "a savage assault inflicted by
 the guards on Brandon X Khotso," which left him partially crippled. The ANC main-
 tains that all detention camps outside South Africa have been closed. Thus far,
 there have been no independent inspections of ANC camps. There is no evidence
 that those responsible for these abuses have been held accountable. The training of
 ANC combatants reportedly continued in Uganda at year's end.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under Ugandan law a suspect must be
 charged within 24 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or released on bail within
 240 days (480 days for a capital offense). Neither requirement was enforced in 1992.
 In August Chief Justice Wako Wambuzi directed magistrate judges to advise pris-
 oners of their right to apply for bail after they had been held for the stipulated re-
 mand period and to favorably consider their applications. The Uganda Law Society
 operated legal aid clinics in Kampala, Jinja, and Masaka for members of the public
 who cannot afford to pay for legal services, assisting over 100 people in 1992.
 The Government has a variety of legal means of detaining indefinitely suspected
 opponents. The Public Order and Security Act of 1967 (the "detention order-) per-
 mits unlimited detention without charge, but the Act has not been invoked by the
 NRM. However, the Government continued to use treason, broadly interpreted, as
 a holding charge while investigations were undertaken. The charge of treason allows
 the Government to detain a suspect for 480 days before bringing him to trial or con-
 sidering an application for bail.
 In the early months of 1992, the NRA continued to arrest suspected rebels in
 northern and eastern Uganda, most of them in January in the eastern districts of
 Soroti, Kumi, and Mbale. Although most were turned over to civil authorities within
 10 days of their capture, the NRA continued to use incommunicado detention in
 some cases. Reports of people being taken into custody by the army in Gulu and
 Kitgum districts durin garmy operations in March could not be confirmed.
 About 2,700 persons    a en arrested by" the army over the previous 5 years as
 suspected rebels, rebel sympathizers, and deserters." During 1992 the army took
 200 additional prisoners (far fewer than in previous years) and released 2,600. Act-
 ing on the recommendations of a special investigations branch set up by the army
 to expedite the large backlog of cases, President Museveni pardoned more than
 1,500 prisoners in August, including 1,000 soldiers who were sentenced to prison en
 masse as "deserters" in 1991. About 1,100 other prisoners arrested by the army
 were released gradually throughout the year. At the end of 1992, about 300 pris-
 oners arrested by the army for security reasons remained in civil or military deten-
 tion. During 1992 the total number of prisoners held by the Government declined
 from approximately 12,500 to 10,000.
 With the releases in August, the Ministry of Justice reported that the last of the
 "lodgers"-suspected rebels apprehended by the army and held without charge-
 were released. Credible reports, however, indicated that half a dozen prisoners who
 fit into that category were still being held at Luzira prison.
 Among the persons held by the Government are a number of political detainees
 and prisoners, most of them on a charge of treason. In January the Government
 dropped charges against 14 of 18 northern politicians who had been arrested and
 charged with treason in 1991. Two Democratic Party officials were arrested and
 charged with treason in January. In addition, 16 members of the Uganda Peoples
 Congress party were detained for a few hours on January 21 but were released
 without charge. The six politicians who were still being held on treason charges at
 the end of January were acquitted or released for lack of evidence during the first
 half of 1992. Another politican (Moses Ali) was tried for treason in a separate case
 and acquitted. In other treason cases, charges against 20 elderly Buganda monar-
 chists, known as the "Kirimuttu," were dropped in July, and 59 suspected rebels
 charged with treason in October 1991 were released in September after the charges
 were withdrawn for lack of evidence. (Four others died of apparently natural causes
 while on remand in Gulu prison.) Three more were released in late October. At
 year's end, about 130 Ugandans arrested between 1986 and 1992 were believed to
 e awaiting trial or court-martial for treason; this was a sharp decrease from the
 beginning of the year. One human rights organization estimated the number at 125.
 In 1992 a number of journalists and party activists were detained on various
 charges (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.).
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. A presidential amnesty for former
 rebels is in effect and applies to opponents in exile. Those who return, however, may
 be prosecuted for criminal acts they are alleged to have committed. At least two self-
 exiled political dissidents returned toUanda in 1992 and were not prosecuted.
 e. Denial of" Fair Public TriaL.-The Ugandan court system consists of magistrates
 courts, the Hig Court, and the Supreme Court. The judicial system contains proce-
 dural safeguards modeled after British law, including the granting of bail and ap-
 
 
 286
 peals to higher courts. The right to a fair trial in Uganda has been circumscribed
 in recent years by: the reluctance of military authorities to respect civilian court or-
 ders; the use of military field tribunals in remote areas; an inadequate system of
 judicial administration; and the apparent lack of official commitment to ensuring an
 independent judicial system. Additionally, a serious backlog of cases denies most de-
 fendants a speedy trial. About half of those imprisoned in Uganda have not been
 brought to trial. Accused persons, once brought to trial, are normally accorded a fair
 public hearing.
 The judiciary is generally independent; the Government usually complies with
 court decisions. However, in May the Uganda Law Society issued a memorandum
 complaining of executive interference in the judiciary, citing the case of a ma istrat
 who was suspended in February after defying a directive from the Attorney General/
 Minister of Justice to consider certain applications for bail.
 The President has significant influence over judges, including appointment of the
 four members of the Judicial Service Commission, which makes recommendations
 on High Court and Supreme Court appointments. The Commission must concur in
 the dismissal of a magistrate. A judge may be removed only after a tribunal com-
 prised of three other judges finds that he is "unable to perform the functions of his
 office." No judges were removed in 1992, but in September the Commission advised
 that an acting jud, whose appointment to the High Court it had recommended a
 year earlier, should be suspended.
 Village Resistance Councils (RCs) have the authority to settle civil disputes, in-
 cluding disputes over land ownership and payment of debts. Occasionally the RC
 courts have exceeded their authority and heard criminal cases, including murder
 and rape cases. The RC decisions may be appealed in magistrates courts, and in
 1992 trained magistrates were assigned to the RC courts. In September Attorney
 General Abubaker Mayanja advised RC officials that at least five panelists should
 be present throughout the proceedings in a case before an RC court.
 Suspected thieves and other offenders caught committing a crime are often subject
 to mob justice. Some individuals were prosecuted in 1992 for administering mob jus-
 tice.
 Military tribunals hear charges against soldiers- any soldier accused of a capital
 offense is supposed to be assigned counsel. An NKA legal aid program was estab-
 lished in 1991 to defend soldiers in civil and criminal cases, but figures on the num-
 ber of beneficiaries were not available. Military punishment is strict, and in pre-
 vious years NRA soldiers have been executed after being convicted by military tribu-
 nals in summary trials which failed to meet international standards. No executions
 are known to have occurred in 1992 although some soldiers were sentenced to death
 for murder (including a senior oicer anf 11 soldiers who killed 7 civilians in
 Kitgum whom they suspected to be "rebel sympathizers"). Those found guilty of less-
 er offenses serve time in civilian prisons. The NRA code of conduct provides for field
 tribunals to dispense summary justice in remote areas; however, no field tribunals
 were held in 1992.
 A 1989 law permitting the establishment of special magistrates courts in areas
 of insurgency has never been implemented. Commissions charged with reforming
 and updating the laws have not functioned for years.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Pivacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Outside
 of insurgency areas, the Government does not generally intrude into the privacy,
 family, or home of citizens, and there is no indication that the Government inter-
 fered with private correspondence in 1992. Search warrants are required before po-
 lice may enter private homes or offices. This requirement was violated in a few in-
 stances in 1992.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Counterinsurgency operations by the NRA diminished greatly during the
 second half of 1991; consequently, the number of abuses in 1992 was much lower
 than in previous years. Moreover, President Museveni went to the north to oversee
 the military effort, in part to help prevent a repetition of the massive human rights
 violations committed by the NRA during operations the previous year. There were
 instances of rape by NRA soldiers, although many fewer than in 1991 (see Section
 5). In a cordn-and-search operation in Soroti during the winter and spring, the
 NRA detained about 200 suspected rebels and killed about 70. In some areas, Local
 Defense Units (LDU's) were responsible for abuses against civilians, beating sus-
 pects and stealing food. In Gulu, Kitgum, Kumi, and Soroti districts, LDU's were
 reorganized in 1992 and put under the authority of resistance councils and local
 chiefs.
 There were reports of abductions and killings of civilians by remnants of the Unit-
 ed Democratic Christian Army (UDCA) in northern Uganda, the Uganda People's
 Army (UPA) in the northeast, and the National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
 
 
 287
 (NALU) in the western Ruwenzori Mountain area. Most rebel ambushes in the first
 half of 1992 reportedly occurred in Gulu and Kitgum districts, and the NRA under-
 took small-scale operations in those areas in March. NALU was responsible for the
 few attacks reported in the summer and fall.
 The Uganda Government has been accused of supporting the rebel Rwandan Pa-
 triotic Front (RPF) in fighting against the Rwandan armed forces from base areas
 in Uganda. Many of the rebels are former NRA members. The ongoing conflict fol-
 lowing rebel attacks has resulted in civilian casualties and has disrupted the democ-
 ratization of Rwanda. This conflict continued to affect Uganda's southwestern bor-
 der area. Prior to a cease-fire in July Ugandan civilians suffered from shelling near
 the border, and thousands remained displaced by the conflict. At the end of the
 year Uganda was playing a constructive role as an observer at peace talks between
 the Awandan Government and the RPF.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech is restricted by the Govern-
 ment's limitations on political party activities and by periodic arrest of journalists
 and others on spurious charges. Nevertheless, despite de facto and proposed de jure
 restrictions onparty rallies, mobilization, and other public activities, open debate
 occurs in the NRC, in the press, and in many public forums. Public figurespriticize
 government policies, corruption, and human rights abuses.
 Over a dozen newspapers publish a wide range of viewpoints covering the political
 spectrum. Despite the restrictions on partisan activity, several parties publish news-
 papers to promote their views. The Democratic Party (DP) publication, The Citizen,
 is often critical of government policy, as is the pro-DP magazine Exposure. In Sep-
 tember the Uganda Peoples Congress-affiliated weekly paper People resumed publi-
 cation. The Government owns the New Vision, which has accurately reported on cor-
 roption   government and human rights abuses by the NRA.
 Although the press enjoys considerable freedom, the Government has arrested
 some journalists on sedition, defamation, and other charges. Lt. Matthew Akuta-
 Too, arrested in 1991 for violating the NRA code of conduct by revealing umilitary
 secrets" in a New Vision article was held by the army without charge throughout
 much of 1992. He was detained in Makindye barracks although he was seriously
 ill. Akuta died in Mulago Hospital of apparently natural causes in November. Three
 other journalists arrested in 1991 remained out on bail awaiting trial. John Baptist
 Kyeyune, editor of The Citizen was arrested for sedition after criticizing an NRA
 pan to disburse cash to soldiers in ieu of food rations. Saul Katabarwa, editor of
 the weekly Guide, faced defamation charges for statements printed about the Min-
 ister of Justice. Captain Roland Kkoza, publisher of Economy, and Mulengra, an
 emproyee of the NRM secretariat, were awaiting trial for sedition. " September the
 High Court awarded approximately $2,000 to Attorney General, Minister of Justice,
 and Third Deputy Prime Minister Abubaker Mayanja in settlement of a defamation
 suit against Teddy Seezi Cheeye, editor of Uganda Confidential. Cheeye faced addi-
 tional charges of defamation for stories published in the Confidential.
 Uganda Television (UTV) and Radio Uganda are controlled by the Government.
 They disseminate NRM views but also broadcast discussions of public poliy that
 reflect a variety of opinion. Politicalparty spokespersons have appeared on UT and
 Radio Uganda, usually to face critica interviewers.
 Unlike the regimes that preceded it, the NRM has not instituted formal censor-
 ship. However, he legal provisions for doing so remain. Some journalists say that
 they exercise self-ensorhip to avoid trouble. A journalism bill" proposed in 1991
 called for the creation of a media council to monitor and discipline journalists. The
 bill was strongly criticized by members of the press and has not been tabled before
 the NRC.
 b. Feedom of Pe aceful A.sembly an As sociation.TPermits for public gatherin s
 must be obtained from police authorities, who have the right to deny te hrmit in
 the interest of public safety. Although political parties are not banned, political ac-
 tivity is restricted, and political rallies are not allowed. At midyear the Government
 proposed legislation that would have imposed specific limits on party activities, but
 the legislation was never brought before the NRC. Two Democratic Party officials
 were arrested in January and charged with treason; one was released for lack of
 evidence on April 28, and the other was acquitted on May 29. Sixteen members of
 the Uganda Peoples Congress party were detained for a few hours on January 21
 and then released without charge. All associations in Uganda must register with the
 Government. Professional associations operate without hindrance, as do inter-
 national service associations.
 c. Freedom of Religion-There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity, Islam,
 Hinduism. and African traditional religions are freely practiced. Conversion between
 
 
 288
 religions is not obstructed. Foreign missionaries and other religious figures are gen-
 erally welcome in Uganda. There is no government control of religious publications,
 even those with an antigovernment bias. Religious leaders frequently speak out pub-
 licly on topics relating-to their followers' wefare, addressing in particular human
 rights,_ security, and political issues.
 ~While it has not been uniformly enforced, the Government requires religious
 groups to register as nonvernmental organizations (NGO). The Church of Uganda
 and the Catholic Church h0ave been active for over a century, although it was discov-
 ered in August that neither is registered as a NGO. The Churches may be required
 to register, but their activities are not likely to be curtailed.
 The International Bible Students Association (Jehovah's Witnesses) was reg-
 istered as a NGO in June, allowing it to carry out evangelical work in Uganda. The
 registration was granted on the condition that the Witnesses "participate in national
 politics, army, police, and prisons (sic)." The Witnesses were denied registration in
 1991 for failing to agree to similar conditions; in 1992 they were registered without
 being consulted about the conditions.
 In July, 10 Muslim youths of the Tabliq sect were acquitted of the murder of four
 policemen during protests following a decision by the Supreme Court concerning the
 authority of a rival Muslim leader. The 10 were rearrested on charges of rioting,
 unlawfulassembly, and malicious damage to property during the same incident and
 then freed on bail. Charges of rioting and maliciously damaging property against
 224 other Tabliqs were dropped.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-As security conditions improved, freedom of movement in Uganda ex-
 andedatl      Access to some areas, however, continued to be slightly restricted.
 required vehicles to travel in convoys on the route between Karuma and
 Pakwach in the northwest Travel in the east, and particularly in Karamoja, re-
 mained difficult due to sporadic attacks by armed bandits. The requirement that for-
 eig diplomats obtain apprva to travel mere than 25 kilometers from Kampala re-
 mainedin effect but was not enforced. Ugandans are free to emigrate and to travel
 abroad.
 Uganda accommodates refugees from Sudan, Rwanda, Kenya, Zaire, and other
 countries. There were approximately 150,00 registered and an equal number of un-
 registered refugees in Uganda in 1992. Most of the latter are Rwandans who have
 lived in Uganda since the early 1960's. A July cease-fire between the RPF and the
 Rwandan Armed Forces revived hopes that some of these refugees might be repatri-
 ated. The number of Sudanese refugees in Uganda increased from about 76,000 at
 the beginning of the year to about 90 000 at year's end. They fled an intensifying
 civil war between the Sudanese armed forces and the Sudanese People's Liberation
 Army.
 Some 1,000 Zairian refugees who crossed into Uganda in 1992 were resettled in
 camps away from the border but 14,000 opted to return to Zaire rather than be re-
 located. An additional 3,000 Zarian refugees entered the Uganda border area in De-
 cember. There were no instances of expulsion or forced repatriation of refugees in
 1992.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Ugandan citizens could not change their national government by democratic
 means in 1992. Efforts to propose legislative restrictions on party activities drew se-
 rious national and international criticism and were not acted upon.
 President Museveni serves as chief executive Minister of Defense, and Chairman
 of the National Executive Committee. Althougii he was not elected and has never
 faced a vote of confidence, Museveni maintains a great deal of authority by virtue
 of his personality, local tradition, Uganda's history, and his position as the head of
 the army. He has avoided serious confrontations with major institutions and inter-
 est groups (including the parties), but there are no meaningful checks and balances
 on his presidential power. Museveni has publicly stated his opposition to multiparty
 politics but has said that he will accept such a system if it emerges from the delib-
 erations on a new constitution.
 In February and March, scheduled elections to Resistance Councils up to the dis-
 trict level were held throughout the country, candidates were not permitted to cam-
 paign or advertise their party affiliation, and voting was by queuing. Elections to
 the NRC were neither scheduled nor carried out and are not expected to be held
 prior to the national elections scheduled for 1994.
 The Ministers of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs released a draft Con-
 stituent Assembly Bill in October outlining the composition and duties of the body
 which is to debate, amend, and promulgate the Constitution. It calls for 180 mem-
 
 
 bers to be elected to the Constituent Assembly by direct, secret ballot and the ap-
 pointment of 45 other members representing special interests such as parties,
 women, youth, and the army. The bill was expected to be brought before the NRC
 at its next session, probably in January 1993. At the end of the year, the Constitu-
 tional Commission had not released a draft of the new constitution, a requisite step
 towards national elections in 1994.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics. Women
 hold positions of responsibility at all levels of government. In the NRC, women hold
 38 of the 264 positions, and 5 of the 39 government ministers, deputy ministers, and
 ministers of state are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Although the NRM Government has promised human rights reforms and has cre-
 ated several bodies to address human rights abuses in Uganda, no official findings
 have ever been issued. The Uganda Human Rights Commission, created to inves-
 tigate abuses perpetrated before 1986, is stalled by a lack of resources. In May the
 Commission requested assistance from donor groups.
 In November the Ministry of Justice established a "human rights desk" to receive
 complaints and follow up on alleged human rights violations. The office of the In-
 spectr General of Government (IGG) has overall responsibility for investigating cor-
 ruption and human rights abuses. In Augat President Museveni replaced the Dep-
 uty IGG, who had been the most outpoken proponent of human rights within the
 Government. The ad hoc committee established in 1991 to investigate the status of
 persons held on remand and in military barracks was not given resources to carry
 out its task. The IGG visited Lubiri and Makindye barracks and Luzira prison in
 1992, but planned visits to barracks in the north and east of Uganda were not car-
 ried out.
 On May 21, Attorney General and Minister of Justice Abubaker Mayanja held a
 press conference to issue a progress report on five investigations undertaken by the
 Government into post-1986 human rights abuses. They concerned the army's activi-
 ties in the north in 1988-89; incidents at Mukura in 1989 and at Burcoro and Atiak
 in 1991; and the arrest of "the 18* northern politicians in the spring of 1991. Accord-
 ing to the Attorney General, those responsible for abuses have been arrested in most
 of the cases investigated. However, few details were released by the Attorney Gen-
 eral, and no reports were published. Neither the IGG's office nor the Ministry of
 Justice provided further information on the investigations.
 Two local nongovernmental organizations deal with human rights: the Uganda
 Human Rights Activists and the Uganda Law Society. The Activists publish a quar-
 terly review of the human rights situation in the country and were granted access
 to Lubiri barracks and Basiima house, although the authorities at the barracks had
 advance notice of the visits. In April the Activists held a seminar on human rights
 in Kampala, and they have conducted a number of "workshops" in towns throughout
 Uganda. The Law Society focuses on defending political figures indicted by the Gov-
 ernment and on defending the independence of the judiciary.
 The DP-affidiated Foundation for African Development (FAD) held a series of sem-
 inars on political and constitutional issues but canceled at least one scheduled pro-
 gram in August after the NRC called for legislation limiting party activities.
 Government officials criticized the Activists and FAD during the August NRC de-
 bate on the role of parties. The Government allows access to international human
 rights monitoring groups, but few such groups visited Uganda in 1992. Ministers,
 parliamentary delegations, and journalists from a wide variety of countries did visit
 Uganda to investigate the human rights situation, however.
 The release of Amnesty International's report on Uganda in September (covering
 the period from 1986 through July 1992) was given wide publicity in the private
 and official media. Although the Government objected to the report's findings, it
 made no effort to suppress distribution. The report, "Uganda: The Failure to Safe-
 guard Human Rights, criticized the Government for failing to respond to repeated
 violations, particularly those committed by the NRA, and for failing to provide ade-
 quate protection against extrajudicial execution, torture, and arbitrary detention.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantu (south), Nilotic (north), and Nilo-Hamitic
 (east)--constitute most of the population. The Bantu are the largest group and in-
 clude the largest tribe, the Baganda, with more than 1 million members. Ethnic di-
 visions have been aggravated by civil conflict in the past. The Acholi and Langi of
 northern Uganda feel oppressed by the Bantu peoples of the south. They point to
 NRA operations in the north, -low investment in the region, and Bantu overreore-
 
 
 290
 sentation in the Cabinet, ministries, and the military command as evidence of dis-
 crimination. The Banyankole, Baganda, and other southern tribes, in turn, fear and
 distrust the northerners who have traditionally dominated the military. Many
 Ugandans disdain the Karamojong as violent and underdevelo d, an attitude en-
 couraged by the group's penchant for raiding cattle. The NRMas broad-based cabi-
 nets were intended toknit these groups together, but ethnic problems persist.
 The Government has made some effort to redress discrimination based on sex. A
 Ministry of Women's Affairs was established in 1988. In addition to prominent gov-
 ernment positions, women have been appointed judges and are represented on the
 Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Education Policy Review Commission, and
 the Uganda Constitutional Commission. Discussions between the National Organi-
 zation of Trade Unions, the Federation of Uganda Employers, and government min-
 istries on amending labor laws relating to women did not result in any legislation
 in 1992.
 Traditional discrimination against women continues, especially in rural areas.
 Customary laws disadvantageous to women are still recognized in the areas of adop-
 tion, marriage, divorce, burial, and devolution of property on death. Women may not
 own or inherit property or have custody of their children under customary law.
 Adultery by men is treated mere leniently than adultery by women. Women jeopard-
 ize their Ugandan citizenship by marrying a foreigner, whereas foreign women who
 marry Ugandans automatically receive Ugandan citizenship. The Ugandan Women
 Lawyers Association (FIDA) estimates that 50 percent of marriages in Uganda are
 polygamous. Women do most of the agricultural work.
 FIDA opened a legal aid clinic in Kampala early in 1992 and provided free legal
 advice to nearly 1,000 women during the year. FIDA lawyers also provided informa-
 tion on Ugandan law to women in rural areas and began a will-writing project to
 strengthen women's inheritance rights. There are increasing numbers of public edu-
 cation projects which emphasize a woman's right to be free of sexual exploitation
 and the rights of minors to be protected from sexual abuse.
 Violence against women, including rape and wife beating, is a pervasive problem.
 Public attention, including by human rights groups, has been heavily focused on the
 high incidence of rape, especially by soldiers oprating in the north. President
 Museveni and other government officials have spoen ou  aint such violence and
 in 1990 the NRC passed a law which allows the death penalty for rape. No death
 sentences were handed down for rape in 1992, however. With the decline in rebel
 activity in the north and the withdrawal of many troops, the incidence of rape and
 assault by soldiers against women declined in 1992, although precise information
 is lacking. Some women continue to view wife beating as a customary practice and
 are not aware that it is against the law. The police rarely intervene in domestic dis-
 putes. The Uganda Women's Association and FIDA have been active in publishing
 materials aimed at publicizing the "endemic issue of violence against women. Sev-
 eral Ugandan ethnic groups engage in female genital mutilation (circumcision). The
 Government actively discourages the practice where it does occur, mainly among
 tribes in eastern Uganda.
 Child abuse has recently become a social issue in Uganda. Observers attribute in-
 creasing reports of child beating and molestation to the breakdown of the traditional
 village family structure and to stresses induced by economic problems, alcohol
 abuse, and social dislocations. A large number of children have lost at least one par-
 ent to war or disease; the number of orphans is thought to exceed 1 million by 1995.
 These children migrate to towns and trading centers and may be treated roughly
 by police or employers. Corporal punishment is not condoned by the Government
 but is common in some schools. The conscription of children into the army is no
 longer a common problem. Although many boys fought with the NRA in the bush,
 most were subsequently sent to school, discharged, or they have reached the age of
 18.
 Many of Uganda's youth are sexually active, and girls may traditionally be mar-
 ried at age 14-16. Fear of AIDS has led men to see younger girls for sexual con-
 tact, and prostitution has ihcreased in response to economic difficulties. (Over 30
 percent of girls aged 15-19 who requested testing by the AIDS Information Center
 in 1992 were HIV-positive.)
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Ugandan law recognizes the right of workers to form
 unions, but in practice that ight applies only to private sector workers. The Na-
 tional Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU) is a national labor federation which
 all unions in Uganda are required to join. NOTU is independent of the Government.
 It has long demanded that teachers, nurses, lecturers, professors, and other public
 workers should be permitted to form unions. In November 1990, the Deputy Min-
 
 
 291
 ister of Labor announced that the law would be amended to allow civil servants to
 unionize, but no legislation had been enacted by the end of 1992.
 NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains marginal since about 90 per-
 cent of the Ugandan work force consists of peasant farmers. Even among industrial
 workers, high inflation and lack of transportation have made it difficult for individ-
 ual unions to organize, especially outside the major commercial centers of Kampala
 and Jinja.
 The right to strike is also recognized by law, but the Government expects all ef-
 forts at reconciling labor disputes to be exhausted before workers resort to strikes.
 They must first submit their grievances and notice of strike to the Minister of
 Labor. Under the Trade. Disutes Arbitration and Settlement Act, the Industrial
 Court hears trade disputes referred to it either by the Minister of Labor or the par-
 ties to the dispute. N=   has proposed that the right to strike be recognized in the
 future constitution.
 At least 10 strikes occurred in 1992, with mixed results. Industrial workers
 (Kakira Sugar Works, Marine Workers, Uganda Railways) generally received the
 pay and benefits they demanded. Informally organized strikes by nonunionized pub-
 lic sector workers were less successful. In some cases, workers abandoned strikes
 after a short period without results.
 A tripartite committee composed of NOTU, the Federation of Uganda Employers
 (FUE), and government ministries submitted a new employment act to the attorney
 general in mid-1991, but it was not debated or enacted in 1992. An 'implementation
 and monitoring board" was formed by the Ministry of Public Service to supervise
 layoffs in the civil service.
 NOTU freely exercises the right to affiliate with and participate in regional and
 international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiudy.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized by law and established in practice. Unionization
 and collective bargaining are common in the industrial wage sector but are much
 less significant in the agricultural sector. Although a National Union of Plantation
 and Agricultural Workers exists, the vast majority of small cultivators organize
 themselves on the basis of cooperatives for the purpose of selling their crops. Union
 officials are not harassed, and unions have access to the Industrial Court.
 There are no export processing zones in Uganda.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law. No inspections or sanctions are in place to enforce the law, but there is no evi-
 dence of forced labor in Uganda. The International Labor Organization (ILO) Com-
 mittee of Experts, however, in its 1992 report again criticized statutes which give
 the Government power to restrict freedom of association subject to penalties involv-
 ing an obligation to perform labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children under 16 are prohibited
 from working at night in industrial jobs or underground unless they are under ap-
 prenticeship training. Any employer of children under 16 is required to keep a sepa-
 rate register of their ages and the nature of their employment. The minimum age
 is expected to be raised by the proposed employment act, but the change will prob-
 ably have little effect in practice. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is respon-
 sible for ensuring compliance with the law, but it has not moved against the em-
 ployment of children, which occurs chiefly in informal sectors.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-No explicit minimum wage policy exists in
 Uganda. Wages are set by negotiation between unions and employers or by the
 boards of directors of state-owned industries. This results in glaring wage discrep-
 ancies between the public sector, where most workers are employed, and the small
 private sector. Many workers, including those on government salaries, do not earn
 enough to provide a decent living for a family. Thus, many find second jobs, grow
 their own food, or engage in pilferage or corruption in order to feed their families
 and pay school fees. Although there is no legal standard workweek, the normal
 workweek is 48 hours, and time and a half is paid for each additional hour worked.
 The only occupational health and safety legislation in place is contained in the
 outdated Factories Act of 1954, which concentrates on engineering aspects of work
 and does not address many present-day working hazards. It is enforced by the Min-
 istry of Labor's Department of Occupational Health, but, in practice, little inspection
 takes place due to lack of resources.
 
 
