 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni and his National Resistance Movement (NRM) contin-
 ued to rule Uganda through the National Resistance Council (NRC) and an ap-
 pointed Cabinet since taking power in 1986. The President dominated the Govern-
 ment, the NRC, and the extended transition process to constitutional government.
 In March citizens elected individual members to a Constituent Assembvly charged
 with debating and ratifying a constitution. The elections were open to all candidates
 and internationally recognized as reflecting the will of Ugandans, although political
 parties were not permitted to sponsor candidates. At the end of the year, the Con-
 stituent Assembly had still not completed its work, and the Government extended
 the Constituent Assembly's mandate for an additional 6 months to June 1995.
 The National Resistance Army (NRA) remains the key internal and external secu-
 rity force. In rebuilding the police force, the Government reduced the NRA from
 90,000 members in 1990 to under 50,000 in 1994. The Army along with local de-
 fense units (LDU's), assists the police in rural areas. The LDtJs operate without a
 clear legal mandate. The professionalism of the Ugandan police continued to im-
 prove, but police committed some human rights abuses, and much of the force re-
 mains ill-trained, poorly equipped, and corrupt. In August the Government estab-
 lished a home guard force to assist with the counterinsurgency effort.
 Beginning in February, the Government faced a renewed insurgency threat in the
 north from a group calling itself the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), led by Joseph
 Kony, which committed egregious human rights abuses, including murder, rape and
 kidnaping. In countering the threat, there were also credible reports that the NRA
 and LDI's committed serious violations, including extrajudicial killings in March
 and detention of civilians without charge.
 Primarily based on agriculture, the economy showed strong growth-about 4 per-
 ent--in 1993-94. Coffee remained the chief export crop and foreign exchange earn-
 er, but modest increases in tobacco, cotton, and tea exports also contributed to the
 improved outlook. Despite massive rural poverty, the Government continued to im-
 plement a tough economic reform program. Uganda also continued to depend heav-
 ily on foreign aid, which amounted to 60 percent of government spending in 1993-
 94.
 Although the Government continued to pledge support for democracy and respect
 for human rights, it also carefully controlled the steps toward constitutional change.
 The Government maintained prohibitions on certain political party activities and
 limited freedoms of speech, press, and peaceful assembly. It arrested two politicians
 in March and two journalists in October on spurious sedition charges, and in August
 and September prohibited three seminars on constitutional issues.
 In the renewed insurgency in the north, the LRA rebels committed most of the
 human rights abuses against civilians. In response to the threat, the NRA commit-
 ted a number of serious abuses. Elsewhere, army and police officials sometimes tor-
 tured criminal suspects, particularly after arrest, and beatings during interrogation
 were common. The Government, the NRA, and the police took measures to increase
 the discipline, training, and, in some instances, punishment of security officials.
 Both police and NRA officials responsible for human rights abuses were prosecuted
 for such violations, but the disciplinary measures variedfrom one command or mag-
 istrate to another. Discrimination against women, domestic violence, and the rape
 of women and children remained serious social problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known instances of
 political killings. However in the insurgency fighting there were a number of
 extrajudicial killings by both the NRA and insurgent forces (see Section 1.g.).
 There were also a few reported incidents in which village Resistance Council (RC-
 1) and LDU personnel tortured or killed criminal suspects. For example, in Novem-
 ber in Mengo, two RC-1 officials and an LDU member reportedly tortured a sus-
 pected thief to death.
 In handling an antitax demonstration in Iganga in January, during which anry
 demonstrators tried to overrun a police station, the police used excessive force: y
 firing into the crowd, killing two persons. However, press reports indicated that the
 
 
 276
 police did not shoot unprovoked into the crowd. The Government received the re-
 suits of the official investigation of the incident on December 30.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 NRA officials and police commonly beat suspected criminals, usually at the time of
 arrest or interrogation, and often for the purpose of forcing confessions. There were
 also credible reports of isolated incidents in which security forces used other forms
 of torture. The Government investigated some reported cases and tried and pun-
 ished some offenders.
 There were instances of mobs attacking suspected thieves and other offenders
 caught committing a crime. These mobs engaged in stonings, beatings, and other
 forms of mistreatment, such as tying the suspect's wrists and ankles together be-
 hind the back. The authorities rarely prosecuted persons engaged in administering
 mob justice.
 Prison conditions remain harsh, due primarily to the nation's poverty and budg-
 etary restrictions. Uganda maintains two prison systems; one state-funded and run
 by  is Ministry of Internal Affairs, and a second rural-based under the Ministry of
 Local Government. Conditions are particularly harsh in the local prisons which re-
 ceive no central government funding. These local administrative prisons, together
 with military prisons, have a very high mortality rate from overcrowding, diseases
 spread by unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and AIDS, a disease which ispan-
 demic among the general population. In 1993 there were 508 prison deaths. Juve-
 niles are kept in prison with adults. Women have segregated prisons, with female
 staff, and as a result rape does not appear to be a problem among women prisoners.
 Pretrial detainees comprise over half of the prison population. In August there
 were 11,761 total prisoners, of which 4,253 had been convicted, with over 7500 held
 in pretrial detention. In October, primarily to ease the overcrowding, the Prsident
 pardoned 800 prisoners, including the terminally sick, the aged, and breast-feeding
 mothers, but excluded those charged with capital offenses. The U.N. Development
 Program  and nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) have started programs for
 training wardens, counseling prisoners, and providing supplementary food and
 org  r AISvictims in prison.
 The Government permitted full access to prisons by the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) and local NGO's, principally the Foundation for Human
 Rights Initiatives (FHRI) and the Law Society. P-ison authorities require advance
 notification of visits, a process that is often subject to administrative delays.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exe.a-Under Ugandan law, a suspect must be
 charged within 24 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or released on bail within
 240 days (480 days for a capital offense). The authorities enforced neither require-
 ment. Other extant laws, such as the Public Order and Security Act of 1967 (the
 Detention Order), provide for unlimited detention without charge, but these laws
 have never been invoked by the NRM Government. Legal and human rights groups
 sharply criticized the excessive length of detention without trial, in many cases
 amounting to several years. Acknowledging the problem, the Constituent Assembly
 reduced the length of detention to a maximum of 120 days (360 for a capital offense)
 in the projected new constitution.
 The Government detained both civilians and military personnel on suppicion of
 treason but did not formally charge anyone with treason in 1994. The NRA detained
 approximately 170 civilians in northern Uganda for suspected collaboration with the
 LRA. Of these, it released 34 in October and November and 70 in early December.
 Some persons had been held since February. The Government permitted both the
 ICRC and Amnesty International to visit the detainees. The NRA held 26 rebel pris-
 oners in Gulu at year's end. The Government also temporarily detained journalists
 and political party leaders (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.).
 The Government does not use exile as a means of political control. A presidential
 amnesty for former rebels remains in effect although those who return may be pros-
 ecuted for criminal acts they may have committed in the past. Several prominent
 Ugandans returned from exile in 1994, including Sam Luwero, a former insurgent
 leader of the Uganda National Liberation Army, Aggrey Awori, a former ambas-
 sador, who was elected to the Constituent Assembly in March, Major General Yusuf
 Gowon, Chief of Staff under Idi Amin, and Col. William Omaria, Minister of State
 for Internal Affairs under former president Milton Obote.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Pending anticipated constitutional changes, the
 regular court system consists of magistrates courts, the High Court, and a Supreme
 Court. The military maintains an independent system of courts-martial for military
 offenders. The civilian judicial system contains procedural safeguards, including the
 granting of bail and appeals to higher courts. While the judiciary is generally inde-
 pendent, the President has extensive legal powers, including the power to appoint
 
 
 the four members of the Judicial Service Commission which makes recommenda.
 tions on High Court and Supreme Court appointments. The Commission must con-
 cur in the dismissal of a magistrate.
 In addition to the regular court system, the village RC-r's have the authority to
 settle traditional civil disputes, including land ownership and payment of debts. The
 RC-1 courts, often the only ones available to villagers, frequently exceed their au-
 thority by hearing criminal cases, including murder and rape. RC-1 decisions may
 be appealed in magistrates courts, but often there are no records made of the case
 in the RC-1's, and many defendants are not aware of their right to appeal.
 The right to a fair trial in Uganda has been circumscribed in recent years by an
 inadequate system of judicial administration and resources resulting in a serious
 backlog of cases, the reluctance of military authorities to respect civilian court or-
 ders, and the failure to provide due process safeguards in military courts. The Com-
 mission of Judicial Inquiry, established in 1993 to investigate the mismanagement
 of criminal cases, criticized the excessive delays in the investigation and prosecution
 of cases by the police and the courts. The Commission made extensive recommenda-
 tions for more expeditious processing of cases, elimination of the legal provisions for
 lengthy detention, increased training and funding for police investigations, and re-
 structuring of the office of public prosecution to oversee all criminal cases.
 In June the High Court reported it had over 100 cases pending consideration.
 Criminal cases may take 2 or more years to reach the courts.Many defendants can-
 not afford legal counsel. The Government provides attorneys for indigent defendants
 only for capital offenses. The Ugandan Law Society operates legal aid clinics in four
 regional offices and assists military defendants as well as civilians.
 The military court system does not assure the right to a fair trial. Although the
 accused has the right to legal counsel, the defense attorney is often untrained and
 may be assigned by the military command, which also appoints the prosecutor and
 the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military court, which may invoke
 the death penalty, may be appealed to the high command, but not to the High or
 Supreme Courts.
 The number of political prisoners (as distinct from political detainees) held by the
 Government at year's end was unknown. The courts continued to process the ap-
 peals in approximately 12 cases of past political convictions for treason. In January,
 in the appeal case of Professor Isaac Newton Ojok, a former Minister of Education
 under Milton Obote, the High Court acquitted him, overturning his 1991 conviction
 for treason and sentence to death. Similarly, the Supreme Court annulled the pre-
 vious conviction (and death sentences) for treason in 1992 of Hofni Topacho
 Ogentho Noan Habbas, and Philip Aboth Kerunen; the three men were set free in
 March. Also, in October the High Court acquitted Brigadier Opon Acak and Ahmed
 Oginy in one of the few remaining treason trials. Me trial of Colonel Ahmed
 Kashilling on the same charges was continuing at year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government does not generally intrude in the privacy, family, or home of citizens.
 The law requires that the police have search warrants before entering private
 homes or offices, and this law is generally observed in practice. However, the police
 searched vehicles for weapons at checkpoints without prior warrants.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-There were new violations of humanitarian law, committed both by govern-
 ment forces, and especially by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), led by Joseph
 Kony. Kony is estimated to have approximately 250 to 300 followers, although most
 of his support is reportedly gainedthrough intimidation. LRA rebels oprate guer-
 rilla-style in groups of 5 to 10 it is unclear what, if any, political goals the group
 seeks. The LRA resumed attacks on officials and civilians in northern Uganda, kill-
 ing raping, and abducting large numbers of civilians, and burning homes, granaries
 and other proprty. The group also mutilated some of its victims, cutting off limbs
 or disfiguring faces. Kony's rebels killed over 100 civilians and abducte over 230
 civilians in the February through October period.
 Starting in August, the insurgents used land mines to block northern roads. These
 mines interfered with humanitarian relief operations for southern Sudan and Suda-
 nese refugee camps in northern Uganda. Land mine explosions killed civilians as
 well as sldiers. The NRA provided armed escorts to relief convoys after the United
 Nations and NGO's requested protection.
 In responding to the attacks the NRA reportedly committed similar abuses.
 Newspapers reported that the NRA killed 5 civilians in one village and 15 in an-
 other, raped women, and burned property in February and March. In July, after the
 NRA changed army commanders in the north, military discipline improved, and
 some soldiers suspected of abuses were tried in courts-martial and punished. To-
 ward the end of the year, Kony and a number of his followers reportedly fled to
 
 
 278
 Sudan. The level of the insrgency was reduced, with few reported attacks by the
 rebels in the final quarter of the year.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The NRM Government restricts freedom of po-
 litical speech and the press in a variety of ways but has not invoked censorship laws
 from previous regimes. Open debate occurs in the Constituent Assembly, m the
 NRC, in the press, and in many public forums. While there is also direct criticism
 of President Museveni in the media, such public criticism of high-level officials, in-
 cluding the President, runs the risk of legal sanctions (see below).
 Some 15 newspapers and magazines publish a wide range of viewpoints covering
 the political spectrua, including party newspapers. The gvernment-owned news-
 papr, the New Vision, accurate y reported on corruption in government and human
 rights abuses. The Government controls one television (UTV) station and a radio
 station and in 1994 two private radio stations and one private television station
 began broadcasting. Although these stations are not yet able to reach the entire
 country, m Kampala they have become far more popular than the government-run
 stations. At year's end, all three private stations had fledgling news services and
 broadcast British Broadcasting Corporation or Voice of America news programs. The
 Government has encouraged the development of the private media. During the
 prelection period, UTV and Radio Uganda gave equal time to the NRM and the
 political parties to expound their views.
 The C-overnment restricted freedom of speech and the press by publicly harassing
 opposition leaders through short detentions and legal actions on vague sedition
 charges. In March the police arrested two Uganda People's Congress (UPC) leaders
 and threatened acting UPC Secretary General Cecilia Ogwal with arrest for publish-
 ing the UPC party's manifesto for the election campaign. The authorities released
 the two arrested politicians on bail, and Ogwal continued to campsign, winning her
 seat in the Constituent Assembly by a large majority. In October police arrested
 Ogwal and another Constituent Assembly delegate, Patrick Mwondha, for attempt-
 ing to address a crowd gathered in Iganga. In April the police questioned the edi-
 torial staff of the Monitor newspaper and later arrested the Monitor's editor on
 charges of criminal libel for publishing a story critical of several cabinet ministers;
 they dropped the charges the following day. The authorities arrested Teddy Cheee,
 the editor in chief of Uganda Confidential, for failing to appear in court in violation
 of his bend for 1993 charges of sedition. While Cheeye was able to publish regularly
 throughout the year, he continued to defend himself against several different law-
 suits or publishing allegedly defamatory and seditious articles about the President
 and his wife, cabinet ministers, and other prominent Ugandans.
 In September the NRC began to consider the Ugandan Mass Media and Press
 Bill, first introduced in 1991 and set aside several times for revision. The journal-
 ists' associations have protested the bill's provisions for licensing all journalists and
 publications, the establishment of a media council to monitor and discipline journal-
 ists, and the instituting of district censorship beards. The NRC rejected the bill as
 drafted and sent it to a committee which has consulted with journalists and other
 interested parties. At year's end, revisions of the bill were still m 'rogress.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at Uganda s five public and
 three private universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or
 publication. However, professors appear to exercise caution rather that test the lim-
 its of their academic freedom. Students have sponsored wide-ranging political do-
 bates in open forums on campus.
 The Museveni Government requires many government officials to take NRM polit-
 ical education and military science courses known as "Chaka Mchaka." These
 courses seek to indoctrinate officials in the NRM positions, including Musevenis
 view against multiple political parties.
 b. Freedom of Peacefzd Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts
 these freedoms despite constitutional guarantees. It arbitrarily limits peaceful as-
 sembly by denying permits for public gatherings and barring rallies by political par-
 ties. The police issue administrative permits for public gatherings but have the right
 to deny permits in the interest of public safety. In August and September, police
 barred two seminars on federalism sponsored by the Crusade for Constitutional
 Governance, an NGO. In the first instance, the police cited security reasons and re-
 fused to issue a permit for the outdoor meeting. In the second, after granting the
 Crusade a permit for a September 25 seminar, the police revoked it just before the
 meeting was to begin. In beth instances, armed police officers cordoned off the meet-
 ings sites and refused entry to participants and the public. Also, during the 1994
 election campaign, the Government did not permit Constituent Assembly candidates
 to hold individual rallies, nor permit political parties to call public meetings to sup-
 
 
 279
 port candidates. The Government's statute for the elections prescribed the format
 of candidates' meetings, allowing all candidates equal time to address the public.
 In February the erection Commission withdrew accreditation from the National
 Organization for Civic Education and Monitoring (NOCEM), an umbrella group of
 14 NGO's, for conducting civic education before the election, after the Commission
 received complaints from government officials that NOCEM was partisan. The Com-
 mission allowed NOCEM to continue its monitoring activities through the election
 in March. NOCEM applied for registration as an NGO but was not registered before
 the year's end; all the member organizations of NOCEM had been previously reg-
 istered.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1967 Constitution and the draft constitution provide
 for freedom of religion, and the Government respects this right. There is no state
 religion, and a variety of religions are freely practiced. While the Government re-
 quires religious g.oups to register as NGO's, it does not use this requirement to cur-
 tail religious activities by any rup.
 d. Freedom of Mooement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 _]a triation.--Grwing insecurity in northern Uganda restricted freedom of movement
 due to bandit and rebel attacks on travelers, and, starting in August, the insurgents'
 use of land mines on northern rads.
 Ugandans are free to emigrate and to travel abroad. Uganda accommodates over
 350,000 refugees from Sudan, Rwanda, Zare, Somalia, and other countries. The
 Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 and other humanitarian oranizations in assisting refugees. There were no reports
 of forced expulsion of thosenavin a valid claim to refugee status. The Government
 signed an agreement with the UNHCR and Zaire in August, allowing for the repa-
 triation of Ugandan refugees from Zaire.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Under the 1967 Constitution, citizens have the right to change their government,
 but they will not be able to exercise this right until the new constitution is in place
 and presidential and parliament ary elections are held. In March the first generally
 free and fair election was held to elect representatives to the Constituent Assembly,
 charged with drafting and approving a new constitution. Although political parties
 were not permitted to sponsor candidates or hold rallies, opposition party members
 could stand as individuals for elections, and many won seats (see Section 2.b.). The
 282-member Assembly began deliberations in May on the new constitution, but did
 not complete its work by December as stipulated in the statute. The NRC extended
 its mandate until June 1995.
 President Museveni continued to hold power as Chief Executive, Minister of De-
 fense, and Chairman of the National Executive Council. In November the President
 appointed a new Cabinet that included members of all three major opposition par-
 ties, the Democratic Party, the United People's Conss (UPC), and the Conserv-
 ative Party. However, these Cabinet members' portfolios were generally less pwer-
 ful than in the past. Also, there were few meaningful checks and balances on presi-
 dential power in place. Museveni has repeatedly and publicly stated his opposition
 to multiparty politics but has said that he will accept such a system if it emerges
 from the deliberations on the new constitution.
 The Government has encouraged the participation of women in government and
 allocated special seats for women in the NRC and the Constituent Assembly. The
 President appointed Dr. Specioza Kazibwe as the first female Vice President in No-
 vember. Women hold pesitlons of responsibility at all levels of government and with-
 in some of the plitical parties, one of which (the UPo) has a woman as its highest
 acting official.  the  sC, women held 43 of the 264 positions, and 5 of the 48 gov-
 ernment ministers and ministers of state are n won Tere e 8.women in the
 Constituent Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits a variety of local NGO's concerned with human rights
 to operate, although it monitors these and related organizations if their activti es
 touch prohibited political areas (see Section 2.b.).
 Of 15 nongovernmental human rights organizations, 5 actively monitor human
 rights abuses: The Foundation for Human Rights Initiatives, the Uganda Human
 Rights Activists, the Ugandan Law Society, the Ugandan Chapter of the Inter-
 national Women's Lawyers Association (FIDA), and Action for Development. The
 FHRI regularly visits prisons to monitor conditions and supprts penal reform ef-
 forts. F A concentrates on cases involving women and ctildren. The Ugandan
 
 
 280
 Human Rights Activists publish a quarterly report, which regularly reports on
 human rights abuses and prison conditions. The Government does not interfere in
 the operation of these groups.
 The Uganda Human Rights Commission, created by the Government to inves-
 tigate human rights abuses prior to 1986, published a series of reports in October
 recommending both legal action in specific incidents of past human rights abuses
 and legal anc administrative reform to prevent the recurrence of violations. In one
 case investigated by the Commission, 7 men were brought to trial in Mbarara in
 August for the murder of 16 Muslims in 1979, shortly after the fall of Idi Amin.
 The court released two of the seven for lack of evidence; it convicted five in October
 and sentenced them to death.
 The Government allows access to Uganda by international human rights monitor-
 ing groups. Amnesty International visited northern Uganda in November with full
 official cooperation. The Office of the Inspector General conducted three workshops
 for the army and police during the year in conjunction with the Swedish Raoul
 Wallenburg Foundation, the ICRC, the UWHCR, and other NGO's. The official and
 private media give broad publicity to published international reports on Uganda's
 human rights problems.
 The Government created several bodies in 1994 to monitor human rights in Ugan-
 da. Following a February 1993 presidential directive, the Resistance Councils in all
 districts set up human rights subcommittees to monitor local human rights viola-
 tions. A Human Rights Desk was established within the Ministry of Justice to
 produce reports from these subcommittees. The Desk's first report for 1994 was still
 in progress at year's end. The Human Rights Desk held workshops with the Na-
 tional Resistance Army in Kampala, Gulu and Mbale during 1994 and sponsored a
 workshop for RC-1 members on human rights issues in August.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The 1967 Constitution prohibits discrimination based on these categories, except
 in the case of disability. The draft Constitution includes explicit reference to the dis-
 abled as well.
 Women.-Traditional and widespread discrimination against women continues, es-
 pecially in rural areas. Many customary laws are disadvantageous to women in the
 areas of adoption, marriage, divorce, and devolution of property on death. Women
 may not own or inherit property or have custody of their children under customary
 law. Divorce law sets stricter evidentiary standards to prove adultery for women
 than for men. Women cannot sponsor a foreign-born spouse or the children of such
 a union for citizenship, whereas foreign women who marry Ugandans and the chil-
 dren of those marriages automatically receive citizenship. Married women need
 their husband's signatures on their passport application forms before they receive
 a passport. Women do most of the agricultural work but own only 7 percent of the
 land.
 Domestic violence, including rape, is common, and there are no laws to protect
 battered women apart from a general law on assault. Public and law enforcement
 officials view wife beating as a man's prerogative and rarely intervene in cases of
 domestic violence. Women are mere likely to sue for divorce than to raise assault
 charges against their husbands while still married.
 Children.-The Government has severely limited resources to devote to child wel-
 fare. As a result of past civil war and the AIDS scourge, the number of orphans
 is thought to exceed 1 million.
 Child abuse remains a serious problem. Corporal punishment is common in some
 schools. The press reports regularly on cases of rape, with victims, mostly girls, of
 increasingly younger ages. In 1993 the NRC amended the law to define as minors
 those rape victims under the age of 18. The Government occasionally prosecutes
 rape cases, but convictions and punishment are rare. Observers attribute increasing
 reports of child beating and molestation to the breakdown of the traditional village
 family structure and to social dislocations caused by war and urbanization.
 Female genital mutilation is not widespread, but it is practiced by some groups
 in eastern Uganda, notably the Sebei. There is no law against the practice. The Gov-
 ernment and women's groups are working to stop the practice through education.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Approximately 40 African ethmc groups con-
 stitute the vast majority of the population of Uganda, with tiny percentages of
 Asians and Europeans. Asians, expelled by Idi Amin in the early 1970's, have con-
 tinued to return to Uganda under the current Government's policy of adjudicating
 claims to confiscated property.
 Ethnic divisions between Bantu-speaking peoples in the south and Nilotic speak-
 ers in the north have been aggravated by civil conflict since Uganda's independence.
 
 
 However, only a few minority populations have truly suffered discrimination, such
 as the Pygmies and the Bakonjo of the Ruwenzori mountains, who were once slaves
 within the traditional kingdoms, and the Karamajong, independent cattle herders
 in eastern Uganda, whom other Ugandans consider to be violent and underdevel-
 oped. None of these groups participates fully in Ugandan society, government, or
 educational institutions.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate accessibility to buildings or
 government services for the disabled. Widespread discrimination by society andem-
 ployers limits job and educational opportunities for those with physical disabilities.
 small office within the Ministry of Local Government tries to assist disabled
 Ugandans but lacks sufficient funding.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-There is no single labor code, but a combination of
 laws provides for the right of workers to form unions, and since 1993 this right has
 been extended to civil servants. However, many "essential" government employees
 are still not permitted to form unions; these include the poice, army, permanent
 secretaries in the ministries, heads of departments and state-owned enterprises,
 school principals, and other management level officials.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), the largest labor federation,
 includes 15 unions and is independent of the Government and political parties.
 NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains marginal, since about 90 percent
 of the work force consists of peasant farmers. According to the 1988-89 census,
 about 20 percent of an estimated 400,000 workers in the industrial or modern wage
 sector of the economy are unionized. There is almost no unionization in the large
 agricultural sector, much of which is subsistence farming.
 At the end of the year, Ugandan labor law was undergoing mjor reshaping pend-
 ing introduction of the new constitution. A tripartite committee composed- of several
 government ministries, NOTU, and the Federation of Uganda Employers, reviewed
 draft implementing legislation covering such subjects as a minimum wage, dispute
 resolution mechanisms, and occupational health and safety standards.
 The law provides for the right to strike, but the Government insists that labor
 and management (often a government entity) make even  effort to reconcile labor
 disputes before resorting to strike action. If reconciliation is not possible, labor must
 submit its grievances and notice to strike to the Minister of Labor, who, under the
 Trade Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act, has the option of referrin the dis-
 pute to the Industrial Court. There is no law prohibiting retrbutin against strik-
 ers.
 There were at least 20 strikes among both unionized and nonunionized labor, in-
 cluding those by doctors and health workers, railway workers, teachers, university
 professors, and taxi drivers.
 Labor unions freely exercise the right to affiliate with and participate in regional
 and international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 to organize and bargain collectively, but true collective bargaining takes place only
 in the small private sector of the modern (wage) economy. In the modern sector, the
 Government is by far the largest employer (civil service and state-owned enter-
 prises) and it dominates the bargaining process. The Government has, however,
 adopted a tripartite (government-employers-labor) cooperative app1roach to setting
 wages and resolving labor issues. Both the Government and employers may refer
 disputes to the Industrial Court. The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination
 by employers, but there were no reported incidents of government harassment of
 union officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits compulsory
 labor. However, there is evidence that forced prison labor is employed on private
 farms and construction sites.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Employers are prohibited by law
 from recriting workers below the age of 18, and there is no child labor in the for-
 mal sector, including the export industries. However, many children are employed
 in the informal sector, often on family subsistence farms or, in urban areas selling
 small wares on the streets, or working as domestica. The Ministry of Social Services
 is charged with enforcing the Law on Child Labor, but does so only in the industrial
 sector. There are no minimum education requirements.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Neither the law nor the Government sets an
 explicit minimum wage policy. Wages are set by negotiation between unions and
 employers or by the boards of directr of state-own  inus tries. Salaries are usu-
 ally combined with other incentives (housing, transport allowances) which often
 
 
 282
 equal base wages. The Ministry of Labor's salary scale for civil servants starts with
 unskilled labor earning $44 to $77 per month (40,000 to 70,000 shillings), skilled
 labor (such as clerks or drivers) $55 to $133 per month (50 000 to 120,000 shillings),
 supervisor $155 to $333 per month (140,000 to 300,000 shillings), all with paid over-
 time. The higher end of these salaries would begin to support a family. However
 wages in general are insufficient to support a family, and many civil servants and
 other workers must find secondjobs, grow their own food, or seek other ways to feed
 their families.
 Although there is no legal maximum workweek, the normal workweek is 40 hours,
 and time and a half is paid for each additional hour worked.
 The only occupational health and safet legislation is contained in the outdated
 Factories Act of 1954, which does not adrs man   present-day working hazards,
 such as permitting workers to excuse themselves from dangerous work situations
 without jeopardy to continued employment. The Ministry of Labor's Department of
 Occupational Health is responsible for enforcement, but in practice inspections are
 rare.
