 UGANDA
 In January 1986, Yoweri Museveni and the National Resistance
 Movement (NRM) emerged victorious from the long civil struggle
 against the previous Obote and Okello governments which had
 strong support from northern ethnic groups. Museveni abolished
 the parliamentary structure and established an interim,
 nonelected government pledged to give way within 4 years to an
 elected civilian government. In this interim, Museveni, backed
 by the military, exercises authority with the assistance of his
 appointed Cabinet and the National Resistance Council (NRC),
 composed of a cross-section of political, ethnic, and religious
 personalities. The 1967 Constitution remains technically in
 effect, but key provisions dealing with legislative and
 executive powers are suspended and political activity is not
 allowed, although parties still nominally exist. In 1988
 there was debate in the NRC concerning future constitutional
 arrangements which culminated in the appointment of a
 Constitutional Commission at the end of the year to solicit
 public views and to draft a new constitution. Progress toward
 meeting the 4-year transition target has slowed in large part
 because the Government still faces guerrilla activity in the
 north and, to a lesser extent, in the east from remnants of
 armies loyal to the previous regimes.
 The security structure of the Government is composed of the
 National Resistance Army (NRA) and the police. The NRA, a
 disciplined organization during its earlier days as a
 guerrilla organization, has absorbed soldiers from previous
 regimes and recruited others who did not share the NRA's goals
 before its assumption of power. Discipline and morale have
 dropped, most notably in the contested areas, where up to
 30,000 troops are in the field. NRA soldiers and deserters
 have committed burglaries, automobile hijackings at gunpoint,
 and other crimes even in the uncontested areas of Kampala and
 West Nile. The Government punishes perpetrators when
 apprehended. The police force, which initially had been
 greatly reduced in size by the Museveni Government to
 eliminate opposition elements, had become, by the end of 1988,
 a large force of over 15,000 officers. Despite the
 augmentation of the police in size and authority, the army
 continues to perform many police tasks and will remain the
 main internal security force for the foreseeable future.
 Museveni inherited a devastated economy, and initial NRM
 policies and continued civil conflict helped fuel inflation,
 which in 1988 remained stubbornly high (about 100 percent).
 Moreover, the decline in world coffee prices accentuated an
 acute shortage of foreign exchange needed to help finance
 imports and rehabilitate an infrastructure seriously damaged
 by years of civil war. In 1987 and 1988, the Government
 instituted economic reforms with the assistance of the
 International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. While the
 economy remained in serious difficulty in 1988, there were
 signs that it had begun to improve with a projected growth
 rate for the year of 4 to 5 percent.
 Despite government efforts to address some human rights issues
 and to give human rights in Uganda a high public profile
 through the Commission of Inquiry into the abuses of previous
 regimes, disrespect for the rights of civilians by all parties
 to the military conflict in northern and eastern Uganda
 continued to be a major problem in 1988. As a result of the
 fighting, thousands of persons--some reports indicate as many
 as 100,000 again in 1988--have been displaced. There were
 
 
 389
 UGANDA
 continuing reports of many civilian casualties, of homes and
 fields burned, of detention of civilians thought to be
 unsympathetic to the NRA, and of occasional torture of persons
 in NRA custody. The Government entered into serious peace
 negotiations with two of the main opposition groups in 1988
 and signed a peace treaty with the commanders of the Uganda
 People's Democratic Army (UPDA), but splinter UPDA groups and
 other organizations continued to attack NRA troops at the end
 of 1988. Over 8,000 former guerrilla fighters took advantage
 of the Government's amnesty program, and hundreds of people in
 detention, primarily from the conflict areas, were released
 and returned home. The Government continued to be sensitive
 about press reports covering the activities of the armed
 rebels and allegations of NRA abuses, arresting a number of
 journalists in 1987-1988 on treason charges. In a positive
 move, the Government broadened the mandate of the Commission
 of Inquiry to cover current human rights abuses once the
 present inquiry concerning previous regimes is completed, but
 that is not expected for at least another year.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 While it is often difficult to distinguish between victims of
 the civil war and of political murder, there continued to be
 clear evidence of killing by both the NRA and opposition
 elements in Uganda in 1988. The NRA faced persistent fighting
 in the north and east from various opposition groups, and the
 3-year war by some estimates has claimed the lives of over
 10,000 persons. In the north, the NRA, under the leadership
 of Major General Salim Saleh, convinced commanders of the
 Uganda People's Democratic Army (UPDA) to agree to a cease-
 fire in June and, shortly thereafter, to sign a peace treaty.
 However, the UPDA leadership abroad refused to participate in
 the negotiations, and splinter UPDA groups continued to attack
 NRA troops at the end of 1988. Despite similar peace
 initiatives towards the Uganda People's Army (UPA), the NRA
 has been unsuccessful in concluding a peace agreement in the
 east. Remnants of Alice Lakwena's Holy Spirit Movement also
 harassed government troops in Gulu and Kitgum. Opposition
 forces continued to assassinate local authorities and members
 of the resistance committees, especially in eastern Uganda,
 and killed villagers or burned their granaries for their
 alleged support of the NRA. NRA troops have also treated
 villagers harshly. In a few documented cases, NRA soldiers
 and civilian mobs summarily executed alleged criminals.
 Deputy Transport Minister Robert Ekinu, who had beea captured
 while on a peace mission and held hostage for 8 months by the
 Uganda People's Army, was killed in early August when NRA
 troops attacked a UPA camp near the northeastern town of
 Soroti.
 In August President Museveni addressed soldiers at Lubiri
 after receiving reports that 23 soldiers had broken into the
 prison to lynch a police officer arrested in connection with
 the death of an NRA officer. He stressed that soldiers are
 expected to obey all laws, and said that although the Uganda
 law may be too slow, the soldiers must be disciplined and not
 act outside the law. He promised judicial reform to improve
 the system. In July, at the invitation of the Government, the
 
 
 390
 UGANDA
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) held a seminar
 for senior NRA officials on the laws of war, with emphasis on
 humanitarian law.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearance, common under previous regimes, have
 markedly declined under the NRM Government. However, despite
 requests by village elders and international organizations,
 the Government has not compiled or released a list of those
 held in detention, most of whom are prisoners taken in the
 fighting. Consequently, many families do not know what has
 happened to their relatives. The ICRC is active in tracing
 people for relatives in civilian and military facilities and
 has received government cooperation in specific cases. Still,
 the lack of an institutionalized process of identifying
 prisoners has seriously hampered efforts to account for
 "missing" persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman treatment are not sanctioned by Ugandan
 law, but for many years extreme forms of torture took place at
 detention centers, particularly military barracks, where
 political prisoners-were often held illegally. Human rights
 organizations, such as Amnesty International (AI), have
 alleged inhuman treatment and torture by the NRA, which has
 its own detention centers outside the jurisdiction of Ugandan
 law. The three-piece tie, a form of torture which entails
 tying a person's arms behind his back until the elbows meet,
 is still used, although President Museveni has said it is
 against official government policy. This painful procedure
 can lead to gangrenous infections of the hands and arms as
 well as rupture of the breastbone and asphyxiation. Other
 alleged abuses include scattered reports of rape of women and
 the use of both electric shock and dripping of melted plastic
 on the body as forms of torture. In October the Government
 arrested 6 members of the internal intelligence organization
 in connection with the death of a civilian in their custody.
 The Director of Intelligence Services said publicly that this
 should serve as an example to other officers who abused their
 powers, and the government newspaper applauded the arrests.
 At the end of the year, the 6 remained in prison. No formal
 charges have been filed.
 Prison conditions are substandard with poor sanitary
 conditions, and lack of food, blankets, and medicine.
 Diseases such as typhoid, dysentery, and malaria are
 widespread. In civilian prisons, there are allegations that
 medicine intended for sick prisoners is sold outside the
 prison by prison officials. In mid-June, a government minister
 indicated that Luzira Prison held over 6,000 persons rather
 than 2,000 for which it was designed. (This was heatedly
 refuted by the Government.) The NRM Government has allowed
 the ICRC to visit civilian prisons throughout the country and
 has cooperated in improving conditions in response to ICRC
 suggestions. However, the Government did not allow the ICRC
 access to military prisons throughout the year, despite an
 agreement in December 1987 to allow such visits. Most of the
 persons taken prisoner in the fighting in the north and east
 are held in military prisons.
 
 
 391
 UGANDA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 A number of persons were subjected to arbitrary detention,
 both legal and extralegal, during 1988. Criminal suspects are
 often held without bail--though not incommunicado--for long
 periods of time while the Government investigates. Most
 political and security detentions take place outside the
 regular legal system, and such detainees usually are held in
 either military prisons or as "lodgers" in civilian prisons.
 There are an estimated 2,000 such detainees. A screening
 process for "lodgers" involving review by a screening
 committee, resistance councils, and district administrators,
 gained momentum in 1988. On October 6, 950 prisoners were
 released from Luzira and other prisons in Kampala, the
 majority as a result of the screening.
 Children continued to be detained in 1988, with an estimated
 150, aged 13 to 15, in Ugandan prisons. AI's 1988 report,
 which covers 1987, notes in particular the cases of Kenneth
 Oloya, aged 15, and his brother Bosco Okura, aged 14, who were
 arrested by soldiers in the north and detained without charge
 throughout 1987. They probably were among the 950 prisoners
 released in October 1988.
 Military detainees, drawn mainly from Langi, Acholi, and Teso
 ethnic groups which inhabit the war-torn areas of the north
 and east, are suspected of being guerrilla fighters or
 sympathizers, and are not allowed to post bail. The amnesty
 offered in June 1987 officially ended in May 1988. Before the
 amnesty ended, some 8,500 former rebels from the UPDA, Holy
 Spirit, UPA, and 9th October Movement surrendered and were
 sent to a "rehabilitation camp" at Nabisojjo for a 1-year
 politicization program. The Government announced in October
 that most would be released, and that as many as 5,000 would
 join the army or police forces. In September President
 Museveni again appealed to all rebels to surrender.
 Persons are detained in political and security cases under the
 Public Order and Security Act of 1967, which permits unlimited
 detention without charge. In 1988 no one was charged under
 this law, and human rights activist Lance Seera Muwanga,
 detained under this Act in February 1987, was released in
 March.
 Charles Kagenda-Atwooki, a member of the Uganda People's
 Congress, was arrested after participating in a British
 Broadcasting Corporation broadcast and charged with possession
 of antigovernment documents. His trial was in session in
 December. In May Joel Walehwa was arrested and held
 incommunicado by security officials for 4 1/2 months for
 interrogation prior to being formally charged with treason in
 October. At year's end, a trial date had not been set.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system consists of magistrates courts, the High
 Court, and a Supreme Court. The Ugandan judicial system
 contains procedural safeguards modeled after British law,
 including the granting of bail and appeals to higher courts.
 Members of the legal profession are highly educated and
 generally respected. Persons accused, if brought to trial,
 are generally accorded a fair public trial, although the
 
 
 392
 UGANDA
 process of justice is slow and laborious. The NRM in 1988
 appointed a Permanent Secretary for Judiciary Administration
 to ease some of the burden on the chief registrar and resolve
 problems in judicial service.
 There are no special courts for political or security cases.
 In December the National Resistance Council passed two bills
 that give the President wide-ranging power to declare a state
 of insurgency, authorizing the NRC to taken any measures
 "necessary" to deal with the situation. Special magistrates
 courts would be authorized in parts of the country declared
 "areas of insurgency" by the President. Under the bills,
 these courts would have the power to suspend certain civil
 liberties in the interests of speedy justice, and strict
 adherence to rules of evidence, including the presumption of
 innocence, would not be required. No section of the country
 has yet been declared to be in a state of insurgency.
 In rural areas, the Government has given local Resistance
 Committees (RC's) authority to settle civil disputes, such as
 questions about land ownership or payment of bills at the
 local level. RC decisions may be appealed in the regular
 magistrates courts.
 Military tribunals hear charges against soldiers, and any
 soldier accused of a capital offense must be assigned
 counsel. The accused do not choose their counsel, but are
 assigned a court-provided military attorney. Punishment is
 strict, and several NRA soldiers have been executed after
 being convicted by military tribunals. Those found guilty
 serve time in civilian prisons. There are frequent acquittals
 and appeals resulting in a reduction of sentence. In July the
 Army Council proposed that special courts be established to
 try all cases of armed banditry, including waging war on the
 Government or the public, and unlawful possession of arms.
 Captured rebels charged with treason were to be tried in these
 special courts. No action had been taken on this proposal by
 the end of the year.
 In February two court-appointed assessors advised the
 presiding judge to return a verdict of "not guilty" in the
 long running treason trial case of former Commerce Minister
 Evaristo Nyanzi and six others. The assessors argued that the
 prosecution did not present its case according to judicial
 standards and did not prove guilt "beyond a reasonable
 doubt." In March the High Court acquitted Nyanzi and three
 persons, but found the three others guilty of treason and
 sentenced them to death. The lengthy trial, which began in
 September 1987, was open to the public and covered extensively
 in the press. Among those acquitted was Anthony Ssekweyama,
 editor-in-chief of the Democratic Party newspaper, The
 Citizen. Ssekweyama had also been detained several times
 under the Obote government. The Government appeared to attack
 the judicial independence demonstrated in this case when it
 rearrested one of the acquitted, an NRA soldier and former
 member of the Federated Democratic Movement of Uganda
 (FEDEMU), Major Mpiso, while he was leaving the High Court.
 He is now being held at Makindye military barracks on a charge
 of desertion.
 In other important cases, in May former Minister of
 Environmental Protection and Chairman of FEDEMU David Lwanga,
 who was arrested in October 1986, was acquitted on charges of
 terrorism and illegal possession of a firearm. His case was
 adjourned five times by the chief magistrate because of
 
 
 393
 UGANDA
 failure of the prosecution to prepare a summary of evidence.
 In July former Minister of State Chris Rwakasisi and a former
 security agent were sentenced to death on six counts of
 kidnaping. Rwakasisi's trial began in late 1987 and included
 seven murder charges for which he was acquitted. Also in
 July, former Vice President Paulo Muwanga was acquitted on a
 charge of kidnaping with intent to murder. However, he is
 still in prison facing additional charges.
 Some of the 25 alleged monarchists arrested in 1986, who were
 said to have plotted the return to power of the King (Kabaka)
 of Uganda, were acquitted in 1988. Others have been released
 on bail and are still awaiting trial.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the NRM, interference by authorities with personal
 privacy and family life through harassment of the populace has
 diminished. Roadblocks, designed to intercept rebel
 penetration and smugqling, are much less frequent. 'However,
 the hijacking of private vehicles and armed robbery continue
 in Kampala and other urban areas. In the contested areas of
 the north and east, NRA soldiers turned to stealing, looting,
 and other abuse of their authority. Although required by law,
 search warrants are rarely obtained.
 Under the two bills which authorize the President to declare a
 state of insurgency, NRA soldiers would be given police powers
 in insurgency areas, and individual protections such as search
 warrants and the right to bail would be suspended.
 There was no indication that the Government interfered with
 private correspondence in 1988.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech in Uganda is restricted by the ban on
 partisan political activity and government sensitivity about
 press reports covering the activities of armed opposition
 groups and allegations of NRA abuses. Political parties may
 not hold press conferences or organize rallies and other
 functions at which party officials would speak. Despite this
 restriction, extensive public debate occurs in government and
 nongovernment seminars and in the press.
 Over 15 newspapers publish a wide range of viewpoints covering
 the political spectrum. This coverage includes reporting of
 human rights violations, the ongoing civil war, and alleged
 corruption by government and army officials. Both the
 President and the Information Minister have publicly stated
 their support of a free press, but officials repeatedly warned
 the press in 1988 that "freedom of the press does not mean
 indiscipline and irresponsibility."
 The Government in practice has used a variety of techniques to
 curb press freedom, e.g., detentions of journalists and the
 banning of The Weekend Digest in June 1986 for printing a
 story unfavorable to the NRM. At least three Ugandan
 journalists are currently awaiting trial on treason charges
 arising out of.newspaper articles, including Digest editors
 Wilson Mandera and Jesse Mashate who were first arrested on
 charges of treason in 1986. They were released on bail
 
 
 394
 UGANDA
 pending trial. The authorities detained Lance Seera Muwanga
 in February 1987, ostensibly because of his article in the
 African Concord in which he accused the NRM of human rights
 violations in excess of those committed under Idi Amin.
 Muwanga was released in March 1988 for humanitarian reasons.
 John Kakooza, the editor of The Citizen, was arrested in
 December 1987 after publication of an article stating the
 rebels were in control of important parts of the country. He
 was released but was redetained in March and again released.
 An assistant editor, Joseph Kiggundu, was charged with
 publishing false information in connection with a story on the
 death of former Energy Minister Andrew Kayiira. The
 authorities also arrested on charges of treason, Francis
 Odida, editor of the Sunday Review, in late 1987 for an
 article dealing with Alice Lakwena's Holy Spirit Movement,
 which is one of the opposition groups in the northeast. Odida
 was released on bail in September and is awaiting trial.
 Jackson Binyenda, the business manager of the Financial Times,
 was arrested in May and questioned about terrorism. He was
 detained for 75 days, then released when officials decided
 there was no case against him.
 In addition to these detentions, some newspaper offices
 suffered mysterious break-ins in 1988. AI has been concerned
 about recent trends and in a July 1988 report on press freedom
 in Uganda, pointed out a "serious pattern whereby the state is
 imprisoning or threatening with imprisonment those who
 criticize government policy or performance."
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits for public gatherings must be obtained from police
 authorities, who have the right to deny the permit in the
 interest of public safety. Although political parties are not
 banned, political activity is not allowed; thus large
 gatherings usually occur either on government-sponsored or
 religious occasions. In rare cases, permits have been denied
 to fundamentalist religious groups for fear of public
 disturbances. Professional associations operate without
 hindrance, as do international service associations.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity, Islam,
 and African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not obstructed. There is no
 government control of religious publications, even those with
 an antigovernment bias. Foreign missionaries and other
 religious figures are welcome in Uganda. In March, however,
 the Government expelled a Russian Orthodox missionary for
 publishing information "likely to cause public alarm," and in
 October the Government imposed stricter foreign exchange
 regulations on incoming missionaries. Religious leaders
 frequently speak out publicly on topics relating to their
 followers' welfare, addressing in particular human rights,
 security, and political issues. Because of increasingly
 serious and violent disagreements over Muslim leadership
 issues, the Government submitted the leadership question to a
 Ugandan court in 1987. The Government's insistence on
 adherence to the court's decision has eased tensions within
 the Muslim community.
 
 
 395
 UGANDA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In theory, Ugandans may work or live anywhere in the country
 and move about freely within it. There are no restrictions
 which prevent Ugandans from emigrating. In practice, travel
 within the country in 1988 remained difficult because of
 sporadic guerrilla attacks and rebel activity that cut off the
 north and east from the rest of the country. Since the signing
 of the peace treaty with the UPDA in midyear, travel to Gulu,
 Kitgum, and Soroti has improved, although conditions outside
 these towns, especially Gulu in the north, remained tense.
 Because of clashes between- the NRA and rebel forces in areas
 in northern and eastern Uganda, as many as 100,000 displaced
 persons moved to more secure areas. Food and resettlement
 needs for those displaced persons have been supplied through
 the Government, international relief organizations, and
 bilateral aid.
 In the early 1980's, Uganda was the second largest generator
 of refugees in Africa--over 300,000, the majority of whom fled
 to southern Sudan and northeastern Zaire. In recent years,
 most have returned. During 1988 about 100,000 Ugandan refugees
 returned from the Sudan with the help of the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). An estimated 2,500
 remained to be repatriated at the end of 1988. Another 2,700
 elected to remain in Sudan.
 Because of rebel activity by the Sudanese Peoples' Liberation
 Army (SPLA) in 1987, Sudanese as well as Ugandan returnees
 have fled across the border from Sudan into northern Uganda.
 The UNHCR recognized about 4,500 Sudanese refugees in Uganda
 by the end of the year. About half the 2,000 refugees who
 fled a local conflict in Zaire in 1987 remain settled in a
 refugee camp in Uganda.
 There were no reported instances of forced repatriation or
 resettlement of refugees in 1988.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Ugandans presently do not have the right to change their
 government by democratic means. Yoweri Museveni and his army,
 the NRA, emerged victorious from the long civil conflict in
 January 1986. Museveni immediately abolished the parliamentary
 structure and established an interim, nonelected government
 which is to last 4 years. The Government encompasses members
 of various political power bases in Uganda, including political
 parties and former fighting groups. President Museveni
 broadened his Government in March with a major cabinet
 reshuffle.
 In theory, legislative authority resides in the larger National
 Resistance Council, which has a broad cross-section of ethnic,
 political, and religious personalities. In practice, however,
 the NRC is more a sounding board than a decisionmaking body as
 most major decisions are made by the political leadership of
 the NRM4. Village and district Resistance Councils (RC's) have
 been established in 29 of the 33 districts, and RC's should be
 selected shortly in Kitgum and Lira districts. In the
 districts of Gulu and Soroti, rebel activities prevent the
 election of RC's.
 
 
 396
 UGANDA
 In August a widely advertised seminar on the proposed
 constitution, which was planned by a private group in
 coordination with high NRM officials, was prohibited by the
 Government at the last moment. Prime Minister Kisseka said
 the Government was "working on a timetable for presentation
 and discussion of proposals for our new constitution," and
 called the seminar "premature." The press and some members of
 the NRC criticized the Government for blocking the August
 seminar, and there have been no further efforts to circumscribe
 debate. After much public speculation and assurances by the
 Minister of Constitutional Affairs and the President, the
 Government introduced legislation in October to establish an
 11-member commission appointed by the President to review the
 1967 Constitution, solicit public comments, and draft a new
 constitution. The commission was appointed late in the year.
 There are two female ministers and three female deputy
 ministers in the Government, as well as a number of ambassadors
 and one other (nonministerial) female member of the NRC.
 There are many women advocates and judges, including three
 women justices on Uganda's High Court. At the local level,
 there are two women district administrators appointed by the
 President.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The NRM stresses publicly its efforts in the field of human
 rights and welcomed representatives of AI, the Lawyers
 Committee for Human Rights, and the U.S. Committee for Refugees
 to Uganda in 1988. Visitors from these organizations met with
 high-level government officials, including President Museveni,
 as well as human rights activists and members of the
 government-appointed Commission of Inquiry into human rights
 abuses. The ICRC continued its programs of visits to prisons,
 tracing missing persons, and family reunification. Although
 the ICRC received permission at the end of 1987 to visit
 military barracks, where many political detainees are held,
 the military has not allowed them to make such visits. The
 ICRC had hoped to resume its full program of emergency
 assistance in disturbed areas, but its operations in contested
 areas such as Gulu and Kitgum were still curtailed by the army
 at the end of 1988.
 The Government's Office of the Inspector General has authority
 to investigate government corruption, abuse of office by
 government officials, and human rights abuses. Although it is
 severely understaffed, it became more active in 1988, primarily
 in responding to complaints from both individuals and
 organizations concerning attempts to locate detainees and
 arrange family visitation. An independent organization, the
 Uganda Human Rights Activists, monitors human rights
 developments within Uganda. Its publication, the Activist,
 was closely scrutinized by the Government in 1987, but it
 appeared regularly throughout 1988.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantu (south), Nilotic
 (north), and Nilo-Hamitic (east)--constitute most of the
 population. Of these groups, the Bantu is the largest and
 includes the Baganda, which, with more than 1 million members,
 is the largest tribe. Ethnic cleavages and tribalism underlie
 
 
 397
 UGANDA
 much of the cycle of war and political strife which has plagued
 Uganda for decades. Such fears and concerns remain factors in
 continuing rebel activity in the north and east and in
 considerations of future constitutional arrangements. The NRM
 Government has publicly repudiated tribalism and advocated
 national reconciliation, stating that all citizens are
 Ugandans first and foremost.
 One ethnic group traditionally subject to discrimination in
 delivery of the Government's economic and social services is
 the Karamajong, a pastoral people with a tradition of cattle
 ownership, who live in the semiarid region of northeast
 Uganda. Under many regimes, including the present Government,
 military action has been directed against them in reprisal for
 their violent cattle raiding. The Karamoja region experienced
 serious drought and faced famine in late 1987 exacerbated by
 an influx of people displaced by military operations in the
 east. As the Karamajong emerge from their traditional
 lifestyle, the Government has created a Minister of State in
 the Office of the President for Karamajong to help meet their
 needs. In addition, the Ministry of Rehabilitation is working
 closely with donor agencies to provide relief services in
 Karamoja.
 As Uganda is predominately rural, women have a traditional
 role in agriculture, with significant Variations between
 ethnic groups. Women are not legally discriminated against or
 officially restricted in seeking education or employment.
 Even in urban areas, however, their access to education
 declined disproportionately with the deterioration of the
 educational system and economic stagnation. Families withdrew
 daughters rather than sons from school in times of economic
 hardship. Women played an important part in the NRA's bush
 war, serving as soldiers, intelligence operatives, and support
 personnel. Women lawyers are active in Uganda and recently
 opened Uganda's first legal aid clinic which will provide free
 legal services. The NRM created a women's secretariat charged
 with educating and politicizing Ugandan women, as well as a
 national council of women which is part of the Ministry of
 Local Government with responsibility for coordinating the
 activities of women's groups throughout Uganda.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Under the present Government, most workers have the right
 under Ugandan law to form unions, although skilled workers in
 the civil service are not allowed to do so. The National
 Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), Uganda's national labor
 federation to which all unions are by law affiliated, held its
 first free elections in 5 years in early 1986 and began
 rehabilitating regional union structures. High inflation and
 lack of transport, however, have made it difficult for
 individual unions to organize, especially outside the major
 commercial centers of Kampala and Jinja. Labor-government
 relations have improved during the past year, and unions
 generally have been supportive of government measures to fix
 prices of essential commodities. NOTU participates in
 meetings of the Interional Labor Organization (ILO), and it is
 affiliated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 The Minister of Labor has stated that the Government
 recognizes the right of workers to strike, but it does not
 
 
 398
 UGANDA
 approve of wildcat strikes and prefers that workers first
 exhaust more conciliatory methods of resolving labor disputes.
 Under the Trades Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act,
 the industrial court hears and arbitrates trade disputes
 referred to it either by the Minister of Labor-or the parties
 to the dispute.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively are recognized
 in law.   Union officials are not harassed and are free to
 organize. The arrest of 2 union officials during a Coffee
 Marketing Board strike in June arose from a misunderstanding
 that was quickly resolved. In November 1988 the bank employees
 union successfully bargained for higher pay and improved
 working conditions. Labor legislation and practice is uniform
 throughout the country. There are no export processing zones
 in Uganda.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, except when
 imposed by a court as part of a criminal sentence. r11er the
 NRA code of conduct, soldiers tried by military tribunals can
 be sentenced to forced labor as part of their punishment.
 There have been reports of such labor at NRA military camps
 where captured rebel soldiers are "rehabilitated."
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Most of Uganda's almost 15 million people live in rural areas
 on subsistence farms. In the modern wage sector, the legal
 minimum age for employment is 12 years except for light work,
 which the Minister of Labor may exempt. In addition, there
 are legal restrictions on employing persons under 16 years of
 age in mining and night work, except in the case of
 apprenticeship (according to the ILO Committee of Experts, the
 Government has promised to correct this "anomaly" in its next
 revision of labor legislation).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The legal workweek is a maximum of 45 hours. The minimum
 legal wage is that of the lowest paid person employed by the
 Kampala City Council, currently about $7 per month. In
 practice, most workers--even those who are not represented by
 unions--receive more than this minimum wage. Nevertheless,
 most workers must either work a second job or grow food to be
 able to feed their families and pay the primary and secondary
 school fees. Medical care is supposed to be provided by
 employers. There are also occupational, safety, and health
 standards, but in practice, because of the serious decline in
 the economy, there is little effort at enforcement of labor
 laws.
 
 
 399
