 UGANDA
 The Republic of Uganda is a parliamentary democracy which in
 1984 suffered grave human rights violations. It is governed
 by the Uganda People's Congress (UPC), a party led since its
 founding in 1960 by President A. Milton Obote. Returned to
 power in 1980 by national elections after the disastrous Amin
 years (1971-79), the UPC controls all levels of government,
 including appointments of local officials. While a national
 party, it has its primary strength among the northern ethnic
 groups. The opposition Democratic Party (DP) is weak
 nationally, but has s-trong allegiance among 40 percent of the
 nation's population, especially the Baganda, living
 predominantly in the 10 south-central districts, an area which
 includes the capital, Kampala. Within democratic structures,
 ethnic, military, religious, and economic strife has
 dominated politics; intimidation and violence, rather than
 compromise and tolerance, have been frequent.
 The Amin years left a legacy of violence, aggravated ethnic
 conflict, undisciplined but well-armed military units, and
 economic deterioration that is only slowly and painstakingly
 being addressed. In 1984 armed insurgency in a portion of
 south-central Uganda (the so-called Luwero Triangle) grew in
 intensity and continued to pose a serious challenge to
 stability. The Government also faced banditry in the
 nortnwest, large-scale cattle raiding and accompanying
 violence in the northeast, and ethnic strife in the
 southwest. The security and human rights situation has been
 worsened by an ill-disciplined army. In the Luwero triangle
 alone since 1981, insurgency--and military reaction to it--has
 disrupted the lives of possibly 1,000,000 persons, mainly of
 the Baganda ethnic group. An estimated half-million people
 may have been forced from their lands, losing virtually all of
 their possessions. Tens of thousands have died as a result of
 insurgent terrorism and government counter-operations as well
 as from starvation, illness, and exposure induced by the
 upheaval. From December 1983, when Uganda's key military
 leader, Chief of Staff David Oyite Ojok, died in a helicopter
 accident, through August 1984 when a new Chief of Staff,
 Brigadier Smith Opon-Acok was appointed, there was a general
 decline in the security situation. Following the naming of
 the new Chief of Staff and other key military promotions,
 there was an effort by the Government to instill better
 discipline within the armed forces.
 Grave human rights violations in Uganda occurred during 1984,
 including large numbers of extralegal killings and detentions
 on the one hand by insurgents and on the other by military,
 UPC, and government agents. A trend toward the return of law
 and order, due process, economic recovery, increased security,
 and respect for human rights in general--all of which showed
 signs of improvement through late 1983--underwent very serious
 setbacks in 1984, particularly in the Luwero and Karamoja
 regions. These were caused by a combination of continued
 military indiscipline, the inability of the Government or
 military either to crush or to come to terms with the
 insurgents, a lack of resources, bureaucratic inefficiencies,
 general disorganization, short-comings in public-service
 ethics, corruption, and a lack of faith in the economic future
 needed to stimulate investment, manage rampant inflation, and
 restrain capital flight.
 
 
 361
 UGANDA
 On the positive side, the greater portion of Uganda
 geographically has experienced improved security since the UPC
 returned to power four years ago. Foreign advisors and
 experts continued to provide development and emergency
 assistance as well as military training. With some notable
 exceptions, soldiers were taken off roadblocks in most parts
 of the country, returned to the barracks in large numbers, and
 increasingly went unarmed when off duty. Meanwhile, regular
 police forces grew in competence and, although constrained in
 politically sensitive cases, were better able to protect much
 of the citizenry from lawlessness. Agricultural production
 outside the Luwero triangle and turbelent Karamoja, for
 example, has progressed undeterred. In an important political
 development, the Democratic Party for the first time since
 1980 held major public meetings including an international
 political conference in Kampala.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Extralegal deaths through murder and starvation continued in
 1984 and took place in military barracks housing detention
 centers at Kampala, Luwero, and Nakasongola, as well as at
 Bondo and Arua in the West Nile. Motives for extralegal
 killings are varied, ranging from common criminality to
 guerrilla terrorism and political intimidation and revenge.
 The number under extralegal military and civilian detention at
 any one time is estimated to be in the hundreds. In at least
 one military installation, the survival rate may be less than
 50 percent as a result of beatings, starvation, and illness
 due to overcrowded and unhygenic conditions. Deaths due to
 such treatment and conditions could have been in the hundreds
 in 1984. The Government has denied that such extralegal
 detention centers exist, but has refused the International
 Committee of the Red Cross access to military and civilian
 installations alleged to house such centers.
 Political assassinations and murder with possible political
 overtones continued in 1984 from both anti-government and
 pro-government sides. While precise figures are not known,
 the number of such deaths could be in the dozens in the
 Kampala area.  In January, four European citizens, one with
 the United Nations and three under contract to the European
 Communities, were shot to death in what is suspected to have
 been an attempt to embarrass the Government on the eve of an
 international meeting in Paris. The killing of the Deputy
 Chairman of the Civil Service Commission in April and the
 murder of a prominent physician and former ambassador in
 August may have been politically motivated. In September, a
 Soviet military attache was shot and wounded at his residence
 in what is purported to have been an assassination attempt.
 Insurgents killed at least one foreign missionary in the
 Luwero Triangle and wounded several relief workers in separate
 incidents.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearances through abductions in 1984,
 particularly in south-central Uganda, were common. Abductions
 by the military were also reported in the West Nile region.
 
 
 362
 UGANDA
 Disappearances were the result of guerrilla activity and of
 unsanctioned criminal activity by military or civilian
 security forces and for political purposes as well as for
 extortion. There were also reports of politically motivated
 abductions and extralegal detention of opposition Democratic
 Party members in both southwestern and eastern Uganda. Not
 uncommon, particularly in the Kampala area, were reports of
 persons who were abducted by military or civilian security
 elements and who were subsequently transferred to police
 custody. One such case involved the 19 year old daughter of
 an opposition Member of Parliament (who himself had
 disappeared under unexplained circumstances in January when he
 was accused of implication in the murder of four
 expatriates). The daughter was held without charge for over
 four months first by the military and later by civilian
 intelligence and police authorities in turn. In January 1984,
 11 Red Cross employees--7 Ugandan citizens and 4
 Europeans--were kidnapped; 9 were released or escaped within 2
 days while 2 were held for 3 weeks.
 There were reports in 1984 that Ugandan intelligence operators
 kidnapped Ugandan refugees living in Kenya and allegedly
 returned them to Uganda where they were jailed without trial.
 In April 1984, the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees called this matter to the attention of the Kenyan
 Government.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Credible reports of torture continued to surface frequently.
 Physical abuse, or the threat of it, is employed as a method
 of interrogation during extralegal as well as legal
 detentions. The Government does not sanction such abuse but
 acknowledges that security forces at times engage in it.
 Although the Government has stated that persons guilty of
 inflicting torture will be punished, there is no firm evidence
 that disciplinary actions against offenders are either
 consistent or proportionate to the crime. Torture includes
 burning and beatings which at times result in death.
 Deprivation of food, water, and medical attention is also
 employed as a means of torture and execution.
 Reports of violence and degrading treatment against displaced
 persons in the Luwero Triangle continued in 1984. The
 Government used its own resources, as well as foreign military
 advisers and trainers, to improve military discipline.
 Nevertheless many cases of abuse by both insurgents and
 military elements were reported. Women and young girls in
 large numbers suffered rape, and there were continued
 indications of forced concubinage. There were, in addition,
 reports of children being abducted and forced to work as
 servants to military members.    Looting of homes, schools,
 churches, farms, businesses, and other private and public
 property took place both in the Luwero Triangle and in areas
 of Kampala, much of which was done by people wearing military
 uniforms. In Karamoja, there were eye witnesses and other
 credible reports of brutality agaiakst the civilian population
 by both cattle raiders and government security forces.
 In some instances, men, women, and children have been forced
 by some soldiers to harvest without compensation crops which
 were sold for the soldiers' profit.
 
 
 363
 UGANDA
 In early 1984, the army, civilian intelligence elements, and
 the UPC youth group continued operations against insurgents
 and their suspected supporters in the Luwero Triangle.
 Reportedly non-combatants attempting to flee from
 insurgent-held territory were indiscriminately fired on by
 soldiers. An unknown but apparently large number of people
 were killed. Displaced persons in organized centers were
 arbitrarily removed in February by both military and civilian
 intelligence agents, and many have not reappeared despite
 continued searches. In one case approximately 60 males
 apparently suspected of being guerrillas or guerrilla
 sympathizers were removed from among the estimated 10,000
 inhabitants of the displaced persons center at Nakitoma in
 Northern Luwero district. Only one is known to have
 survived.
 Senior government leadership sought to improve discipline and
 control of both military and civilian security forces.
 However, in at least three large-scale incidents during the
 year, there were serious abuses of the civilian population by
 the Ugandan army. In January, army and militia forces were
 ambushed by heavily-armed cattle raiders in the Moroto
 district of the Karamoja region. Casualties were said to be
 in excess of one hundred. In response, the military attacked
 and destroyed a village near Kangole, killing an unknown
 number of noncombatants. Additionally, throughout the
 Karamoja region frequent military attacks against women,
 children, and older people were reportedly carried out during
 the first eight months of 1984 in which hundreds may have been
 killed. In the Luwero Triangle thousands were unaccounted for
 during 1984, of whom many may have perished from military and
 insurgent excesses, starvation, disease, and exposure in a
 situation exacerbated by the military blocking delivery of
 emergency relief supplies to the civilian population.
 Following the February 20 insurgent attack against military
 and police installations at the district capital of Masindi,
 in which an estimated 50 military personnel and civilians were
 killed, the army retook the city after insurgents had
 withdrawn. The operation lasted two days and an unknown
 number of townspeople were killed. It is not known whether
 there was disciplinary action taken against those responsible
 for the incident. In late May. at the well-known Namugongo
 religious shrine near Kampala, soldiers responded to a
 guerrilla attack and assaulted Roman Catholic, Protestant, and
 Muslim shrines and houses of worship, as well as two boarding
 schools and nearby villages, reportedly killing more than 100
 persons over a three-day period. The Government acknowledged
 involvement bf military personnel in the incident and
 reportedly arrested some soldiers for participation in the
 massacre. However, there is no known evidence of further
 official legal action having been taken.
 There were also reports of improved treatment of civilians by
 military personnel in 1984. In combat areas of the Luwero
 Triangle and elsewhere, there were non-commissioned and
 commissioned military commanders who were praised by villagers
 for attempting to improve military-civilian relations. A
 military detachment providing security at one of the larger
 United Nations High Commissioner for Regugees (UNHCR) refugee
 camps was also praised for carrying out its duties in a
 professional, community-oriented manner. On balance, by late
 1984 there was some evidence that newly promoted army
 leadership was having some success in improving the military
 administration and discipline.
 
 
 3VA
 UGANDA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Persons in Uganda are subject to arbitrary arrest and
 detention. There are believed to be 2,000-3,000 persons held
 without indictment or charges, the great majority because of
 suspected anti-government activity or sympathy. Their number,
 however, is not known with any precision. With the
 cooperation of the Ugandan Government, the ICRC successfully
 conducted an extensive survey of civil prisons and police
 stations in 1984. Among those detained for a period of time
 in 1984 were eight journalists, from three different
 newspapers, apparently for articles critical of the
 Government. It is believed that a total of seven journalists
 are currently detained under the Public Order and Security
 Act. The journalists are: John B. Kyeyune; Andrew Mulindwa;
 Antnony Ssekeweyama; David Kasujja; John Owino; Paskale
 Butere; and John Musoga.
 While only the Uganda police have the legal power to arrest
 civilians, military as well as other non-police security
 elements routinely place persons in detention at military,
 police, and intelligence establishments. Search and arrest
 warrants are seldom used, and persons detained often do not
 appear before judicial authority within the required 24 hour
 period. Bail is granted, but reportedly often not in a timely
 manner or impartially. Intervention by senior government and
 party officials, as well as bribery or ransom are reportedly
 often necessary to gain release from either legal and
 extralegal detention.
 Although the Government does not practice either internal or
 foreign exiling of its opponents, there are some 300,000
 Ugandans who have sought refuge abroad. In addition, as many
 as 500,000 have been displaced by conflict within Uganda. The
 vast majority of refugees fled to Eastern Zaire and Southern
 Sudan in the aftermath of the liberation war. About 40,000
 Banyarwanda fled to Rwanda and Tanzania in 1982 and 1983.
 The Government repeatedly has invited self-exiles to return
 home as part of its policy of reconciliation and no revenge,
 but there were reports that several returnees to the West Nile
 region had been killed or beaten. Nevertheless, some 20,000
 refugees have returned to Uganda. A number of politically
 prominent exiles returned in 1984, in some cases receiving
 wide media coverage. However, for the majority, security and
 economic conditions, in addition to political opposition,
 apparently remain primary reasons why they remain abroad in
 self-exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The legal profession is respected, but there continue to be
 reliable reports of harassment of attorneys, including
 detention of some lawyers suspected of being politically
 opposed to the Government or ruling party. Magistrates and
 judges are reportedly not always independent or impartial.
 There are no special courts which hear political or security
 cases. However, the Government is in the process of
 establishing a legal department within the military which will
 have responsibility for implementing court martial
 procedures. At present, military members enjoy near immunity
 from civilian authority. There are procedural safeguards
 patterned after British law, including the granting of bail
 and appeals to higher courts. However, legal safeguards often
 
 
 365
 UGANDA
 are not applied because of the over-burdened court system as
 well as partisanship of the prosecution, judges, and defense.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 During 1984 there were numerous reports of small-scale raids
 on the homes of politically active persons opposed to the
 Government. Many of these may have been simple armed
 robberies; others seem to have been the outgrowth of personal,
 economic, or political rivalries. Many reportedly were
 carried out by heavily-armed men in military and police
 uniforms. In September a United States citizen tourist in
 Kampala was assaulted without warning in a public market. He
 was hit over the head with an iron bar causing a compound
 depressed fracture of the skull. After the victim fell to the
 ground, several men dressed in military uniform joined in and
 began kicking him and then robbed him. It was subsequently
 revealed tnat tne attackers had mistaken the American for an
 insurgent leader to whom he bore some resemblance.
 In Southwestern Uganda tens of thousands of Banyarwanda, who
 fled to UNHCR refugee camps in 1982 and 1983, remained in
 tnose camps. There was, however, no large-scale communal
 violence against the Banyarwanda as had happened in the two
 previous years. Of over 10,000 who have applied for Ugandan
 citizenship and whose claims were adjudicated by lawyers
 retained by the Government of Uganda, none has been informed
 officially of the results.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of the Government by the opposition in Parliament
 and in the media is generally tolerated. Political.
 discussions were frequent and generally uninhibited.
 Kampala's independent press reported extensively on security
 incidents, alleged abuses of human rights, and what it called
 shortcomings of government leadership. As noted in Id,
 however, in addition to those already incarcerated, the
 Government detained eight journalists for a period of time in
 1984, from three different newspapers, apparently for articles
 critical of the Government, and these arrests have raised
 concern for the welfare of the journalists and freedom of the
 press. There is also evidence that government security
 elements held DP members under close surveillance, and
 separately persons were harassed apparently because of their
 public or private political stands. The international press
 has been allowed to cover Ugandan events with few
 restrictions, although entry visas can be difficult, and in
 some cases seemingly impossible, to obtain (see section 4).
 Tne Government owns and operates radio and television stations
 and also controls the most widely-read English-language daily
 newspaper. On occasion, these media include factual reporting
 of DP positions, but they show a distinct bias in favor of the
 UPC.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While subject to political pressures at times, the right of
 assembly and association in Uganda is generally respected.
 Non-political events and gatherings--including sports,
 
 
 366
 UGANDA
 theater, fund raising events--abound. Political events
 sponsored by the UPC are numerous throughout Uganda and
 receive heavy coverage in the government-controlled media.
 National celebrations, including Independence Day, are given a
 UPC bias by government officials.  In 1984 the opposition
 Democratic Party held a number of major public gatherings,
 including a national convention in October. With government
 cooperation, including disciplined police security, the public
 rally in Kampala drew thousands of DP supporters to celebrate
 the 30th anniversary of the Party's founding.
 Trade unionism remained limited and subject to government-
 party influence. UPC "workers councils" continued their
 attempt to supplant traditional trade unions. Severe shortage
 of funds within the unions kept them weak. There were a few
 wildcat strikes during 1984, but organized sector-wide strikes
 and other labor protests were absent.
 Professional associations of doctors, attorneys, engineers,
 and accountants operate largely without hindrance, as do
 international associations such as Rotary, Lions, YMCA, and
 YWCA.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Islamic, Christian, and
 African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not obstructed. Religious
 leaders frequently speak out publicly on their followers'
 welfare, addressing in particular human rights, security
 problems, and politically sensitive questions. The UPC is to
 some extent identified with the Church of Uganda (Anglican)
 while the Democratic Party is identified with Roman
 Catholicism.  However, followers of various religions are
 found in both parties. Ethnic divisions and traditionally
 associated religions have spilled over into both local and
 national politics as the various groups vie for power.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement, residence, and choice of
 workplace throughout Uganda. There are, however, restrictions
 in south-central Uganda because of insurgency and insecurity
 in the Luwero Triangle. In 1984, while there was an increase
 in roadblocks in many areas of the country for several months,
 by October many had been removed.
 In the northwest, security conditions did improve in 1984,
 although possibly 25Q,000 of a 1980 estimated West Nile region
 population of 812,000 may remain as refugees in Sudan and
 Zaire, having fled there following the fighting since 1979
 between remnants of Idi Amin's army and the Ugandan army. In
 northeast Uganda, beginning late in 1983 and lasting much of
 1984, killing and marauding by heavily-armed cattle
 raiders--principally warriors of the Karamajong
 people--generated a military response. The fighting may have
 killed thousands and made homeless additional tens of
 thousands, as both sides failed to discrimate between
 combatants and noncombatants. In the southwest one of
 Uganda's largest ethnic groups, the Banyarwanda--whose
 estimated 1,000,000 population may include 200,000 persons who
 have sought refuge in Uganda since fleeing Rwanda in
 1959--continued to be discriminated against by the population
 
 
 367
 UGANDA
 among whom they live, as well as by a Government which
 publicly has demonstrated little sympathy for them.
 Lack of foreign exchange continued to inhibit international
 travel in 1984, but persons were not otherwise hindered by the
 Government to travel abroad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Obote and the Uganda People's Congress have ruled
 Uganda for 12 of the Nation's 22 years of independence. The
 Parliament comprises 156 members of whom 136 are directly
 elected, 10 are specially elected by the other members of
 Parliament, and 10 are appointed members of the military
 forces. Parliamentary proceedings are patterned after the
 British system.
 Four political parties took part in the December 1980
 parliamentary elections--the Uganda People's Congress (UPC)
 led by A. Milton Obote, the Democratic Party (DP) led by Paul
 Kawanga Ssemogerere, the Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPH) led
 by Yowere Museveni, and the Conservative Party (CP) led by
 Mayanja-Nkangi. The UPC won 74 seats; the DP, 51; the UPM, 1;
 and the CP, none.
 In the 1980 election, a Commonwealth observer team reported
 flaws but concluded overall that the election reflected a
 valid political exercise. However, the Democratic Party had
 by 1984 lost 16 of the 51 seats it won in the 1980 elections
 and had onlg a limited voice in Parliament or local government
 even in DP-controlled constituencies. The decrease was the
 result of eight "crossovers", two suspected assassinations,
 three self-exiles, two detentions (one charged and being tried
 for treason; the other uncharged), and one disappearance.
 Museveni now leads the insurgent forces, the National
 Resistance Army, operating primarily in the Luwero triangle
 region.
 While there are members from all ethnic groups in the UPC, the
 Government's central structure is drawn mainly from northern
 ethnic groups (including the Langi, Acholi, and Iteso, who
 together comprise some 20 percent of the country's total,
 population), and is supported by several strong leaders and a
 portion of the population from the southwest, primarily
 Banyankole (approximately eight percent of the population).
 The Democratic Party, on the other hand, draws its leadership
 as well as its support primarily from southern Uganda,
 principally from Uganda's largest ethnic group, the Baganda
 (an estimated 16 percent of the population), as well as a
 portion of the Banyankole.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is sensitive to allegations of human rights
 violations in Uganda appearing in foreign government
 statements as well as international media. An ambassador was
 expelled from Uganda in October 1984, allegedly because of
 media reports in his country critical of human rights
 practices in Uganda. The Government has disagreed publicly
 with United States Government statements and western media
 reports on human rights conditions in Uganda. At the same
 
 
 368
 UGANDA
 time, the Government has encouraged and actively assisted a
 number of journalists from major American and other Western
 news media to travel to and report on Uganda. Senior
 government officials made themselves available to foreign
 media representatives, as well as to visiting foreign
 officials to discuss the human rights situation in Uganda.
 Non-governmental organizations--including religious
 groups--and United Nations agencies worked with the Government
 in development programs throughout the country. An emergency
 relief administration was set up within the Prime Minister's
 office to coordinate assistance and resettlement for persons
 displaced in the Luwero Triangle. However, there were
 government, party, and military elements which impeded both
 the Government's and relief organizations' efforts to deliver
 relief to noncombatants. This situation was caused in large
 measure by the growing intensity of the conflict and
 government regulation.
 The International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC), which
 returned to Uganda in 1983 after being expelled in 1981,
 rapidly expanded its program of prison visits, tracing, family
 reunification, and emergency assistance in the Luwero
 Triangle. Tne largest of the non-governmental organizations
 in Uganda, the ICRC, at its peak in 1984 had nearly 50
 expatriate employees. The Uganda Red Cross continued to be
 very much in the forefront of relief efforts and other public
 service work. However, its efforts in the Luwero Triangle
 were severely reduced during the second half of 1984. The
 league of Red Cross societies, Oxford Famine Relief, and Save
 the Children Fund also continued their emergency and
 resettlement efforts in the Luwero Triangle and elsewhere.
 Acts of violence against foreign employees of international
 relief organizations continued in 1984. In January eleven
 ICRC workers were kidnapped by anti-Government forces. Nine
 of the ICRC workers were released within 48 hours; however, a
 Frenchman and a Ugandan were held captive for three weeks. In
 September a vehicle belonging to a team of German Emergency
 Doctors (GED) was ambushed in the Luwero Triangle. The ambush
 resulted in the wounding of a British nurse and a German nurse
 and the death of a ten-year-old child. This incident played a
 large part in the GED team's decision to evacuate its hospital
 on October 4.
 Amnesty International in its 1984 report (covering 1983)
 expressed concern about the wide-ranging detentions without
 trial of alleged opponents of the Government. Freedom House
 rates Uganda "partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Uganda has great potential, particularly in the agricultural
 sector, with assets including fertile soil, regular rainfall,
 and substantial mineral deposits such as copper and cobalt.
 The Amin era, however, severely damaged productive
 enterprises, and Uganda remains a very poor country. The
 Ooote Government, with IMF assistance, introduced strong
 economic reform measures starting in 1981, and growth was
 impressive in some areas uetween 1981 and 1983 but slowed in
 1984 as the overall security climate worsened. The rate of
 inflation, which tne Government had demonstrated great
 discipline in curbing, increased substantially in 1984.
 Coffee is the source of over 90 percent of Uganda's foreign
 exchange earnings, and economic growth was further hindered by
 a restrictive internationally agreed coffee export quota.
 
 
 369
 UGANDA
 While there are constraints on the private sector (e.g., the
 Government monopoly on the purchase for exports of key
 agricultural crops), the Government encourages a free-market
 economy. Public and private sector wages'were increased
 significantly in 1984 as were commodity prices paid to
 farmers. However, taxes were lowered thereby calling into
 question the Government's ability to pay tie higher salaries
 and prices. By late-October the International Monetary Fund
 and the Government were meeting to discuss a proposed
 additional standby agreement. At the same time, the value of
 the Ugandan shilling deteriorated in the second half of 1984,
 and there were increasing signs of capital flight, suspected
 to be generated by corruption and lack of faith in the
 country's economic future.
 In general, while international and bilateral financial and
 development assistance institutions continued to support
 Uganda's economic recovery program in 1984 and despite the
 considerable progress in some areas, overall levels of
 economic activity remained well below peak levels of the early
 1970's. The per capita GNP in 1982 was estimated by the World
 Bank at only $210.40.
 Uganda's estimated population is 14,265,000 with an annual
 growth rate of 3.2 percent. Life expectancy at birth is 47.8
 years. Health infrastructure, which was devastated during the
 1970's. continued to be one of the Government's top priorities
 in 1984. Infant mortality is one example of the breakdown in
 health care. According to UNICEF, one village near Kampala
 experienced an infant mortality rate of 32 deaths per thousand
 in the late 1960's; this had risen to over 90 in 1984. The
 national average now stands at 92.6. In areas of the Luwero
 Triangle the rate is estimated to be in excess of 300 infant
 deaths per thousand. During the year, a major multi-year
 immunization program was begun by the Government in
 conjunction with UNICEF and Save the Children Fund.
 Rehabilitation and expansion of medical services continued
 focusing on primary health care for children and women.
 Wide-ranging family planning programs, fully supported by the
 Government, were also being implemented.
 Women are not legally discriminated against or officially
 restricted from education or employment. They are active in
 politics at the grass-roots level and hold several senior
 positions in both the UPC and DP National Executive
 Committees. Women are found throughout the professions and
 civil service. In Government, women serve in senior positions
 in the offices of the President, Vice President, Attorney
 General, and Chief Justice. In the 24 ministries, the most
 senior women are the Deputy Minister for Health and the
 Permanent Secretary for Lands, Mineral and Water Resources.
 There are 10 additional senior-ranking women in 9 of the
 ministries.
 Along with medical services, the Government has made
 rehabilitation of the educational infrastructure--
 internationally renowned in the 1960's and a notable casualty
 of the Amin period--a top priority. While public funds are
 short, many self-help groups formed by parents, teachers,
 religious, and other civic groups provide much of the material
 and labor to rehabilitate local schools. The Government backs
 such undertakings enthusiastically. In 1981 the primary
 school enrollment ratio reached 64.6 percent and adult
 illiteracy rate was set at 47.4 percent with the female
 illiteracy rate 14 percent higher than the male.
 
 
 370
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UGANDA
 1982     1983    1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        7.4      7.8      9.1
 LOANS ..............  ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.4     7.8      9.1
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  7.0   7.6      9.1
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.0     7.6      9.1
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..          0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       0.4      0.2      0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.4     0.2      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........       0.4      0.2      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.        0.0      0.2      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.4      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      . 0.0     0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.1      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        7.5      7.9      9.2
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.5     7.9      9.2
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............  ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ..........  113.2   140.0    164.0   652.9
 IBRD              0.0      0.0      0.0      8.4
 IFC               0.0      9.7      2.9     15.8
 IDA              109.0    124.0    123.0   488.0
 1D8               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFD8               0.0     0.0     38.1     65.3
 UNOP               4.2      1.1     0.0     53.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      5.2     0.0     21.6
 EEC               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 371
