UGANDA
The State Department's 1991 report provides a thorough and generally accurate description of the human rights situation in Uganda. The report notes that extensive human rights violations occurred during 1991, appropriately stating that as in prior years, the context for most violations is the continuing insurgency in northern Uganda but also noting that violations also occurred outside the area of unrest. The report provides substantial evidence of such violations.
In an improvement upon prior reports, this year's report contains accurate and detailed descriptions of the National Resistance Army's (NRA) use of torture. The report also malces appropriate note of the persistent refusal by the NRA to obey the rule of law, including judicial decisions; the arbitrary detention and subsequent mistreatment of civilians by the NRA when engaged in counter-insurgency activities; and the practical limitations on the right to a fair trial. It also discusses in commendable detail restrictions on freedoms of speech, press and association.
The principal weakness of the report is its tendency to present evidence of human rights violations without providing sufficient analysis of the underlying context or causes. In particular, it does not adequately address doubts that have been raised about the willingness of President Museveni's National Resistance Movement (NRM) government to acknowledge or assume responsibility for the country's human rights problems. These concerns, raised in two human rights reports in 1991, one by Amnesty International and another by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York (the New. York City Bar Association), go unmentioned by the State Department, despite their significance. President Museveni came into office professing to be a champion of human rights and he continues to speak as if human rights are a priority to his government, but as the years have passed, there is increasing reason to be skeptical. The State Department fails to reflect this skepticism and in so doing misses a fundamental point.
386
Uganda
At the outset, the report makes the valid and important observation that the Ugandan president exercises broad authority through the National Resistance Council, an appointed cabinet and the NRA, and that this power is basically unchecked. The report fails to state, however, that despite this broad grant of authority, the president has been either unable or unwilling to maintain control of the NRA. Although the report mentions that a number of soldiers have been executed for alleged wrongdoings, solid evidence exists to show that as a general matter it is usually soldiers who commit wrongdoing while "off-duty" who are meaningfully punished. Human rights monitors report that, for the most part, the government's efforts to conclude investigations into violations committed by "on-duty" soldiers have been inadequate. In only a few cases has the government acknowledged violations committed by "on-duty" soldiers, conducted investigations into those violations and punished offenders.
The report should have mentioned that a commission formed in 1989 to investigate allegations of abuse and mistreatment of civilians in Gulu by the NRA was disbanded in response to criticism that it was doing nothing and replaced by a second commission. By May 1991, still no report had been released, and the head of the commission disclosed to the New York City Bar Association that the commission had been dormant, without necessary resources such as personnel, transport or stationery. While the commission's efforts have resumed, apparently in response to pressure from human rights observers, still no report has been forthcoming.
Nor does the report mention concerns raised that President Museveni's unwillingness to hold the NRA accountable for human rights violations is in part because of the belief that the NRA has become the country's most important political force and that he cannot afford to antagonize it. The Uganda Law Society and others have given credence to this theory, expressing concerns that the NRA will be given a disproportionate role in the constituent assembly that has been convened to adopt a new constitution and that will determine the future form of Uganda's government.
387
Uganda
The report also fails to comment upon what human rights observers fear to be an increasing trend on the part of the government to harass, detain and imprison politicians, journalists, lawyers and others who complain publicly about the government's human rights violations or otherwise oppose or express criticism of government policies. According to Amnesty International, the 18 prominent northerners whose arrest is discussed in the report were arrested for reasons that include the investigation of alleged embezzlement of funds, local power struggles, opposition to NRA actions in the north and criticism of government policy. Three of the 18, Daniel Omaro Atubo, Zachary Olum and Irene Apiu Julu, were reportedly arrested after a meeting of northern politicians at which concerns about the conduct of NRA troops in northern Uganda were expressed. Another was arrested after criticizing the government's human rights violations. Prior to his arrest, Tiberio Atwoma Okeny, a leader of a minor political group, the National Liberation Party, had been a frequent critic of both the Ugandan government and the rebels, and had often spoken out concerning alleged human rights violations by both groups. Most recently, he had alleged that there was a deliberate policy of spreading Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) in the north through homosexual rape by NRA soldiers. Press reports had carried similar allegations.
This disturbing trend of arresting government critics appears to be continuing. In January 1992, five senior Democratic Party (DP) officials and 16 Uganda People's Congress (UPC) leaders were reported to have been arrested in what was referred to in the press as a "sweeping crackdown on political dissent." Many of those arrested were charged with the now familiar holding charge of treason. Political analysts are saying that President Museveni's ability to rule could be threatened by his alienating the DP and UPC. One western diplomat said "the rebels do not pose much of a threat by themselves, but the government risks a major political crisis if the opposition forces unite."
In its generally thorough description of press freedom in Uganda, the report does not mention the news blackout imposed by the NRM in connection with the March offensive against rebels in the north or the confiscation of radios of the nongovernmental relief and aid organizations
388
Uganda
operating in the area to prevent them from sending news outside the area, as was reported by the New York City Bar Association. Nor does it mention the new press law proposed by the Museveni government in 1991 that, among other things, would have empowered law officers to confiscate machines used to print "seditious" material and have imposed heavy fines and/or prison sentences of up to two years for newspaper vendors who sell unregistered or banned publications. In this vein, the report should have pointed out that, unlike the coverage the Ugandan press gave to previous Amnesty International reports on Uganda, important independent and government news organizations did not publish excerpts of the 1991 Amnesty report which was more critical of the government and the NRA than previous reports had been. The report accurately infers that arrests and beatings of several outspoken government critics "undoubtedly tightened self-censorship among others. "
The report also fails to give appropriate context to its discussion of the ineffectiveness of the organizations established by the Ugandan government to monitor human rights. The report makes the accurate and important observation that the work of the Human Rights Commission has been hampered by lack of resources, but it should have emphasized the fact that the Commission has failed to issue a report since it was formed over five years ago to investigate human rights violations by prior governments. Nor does the report comment on the failure of the Inspector General of Government (IGG), charged with investigating human rights violations by the current government, to issue a report since its formation several years ago. The State Department reports that the IGG was directed in October to focus exclusively on corruption without noting that, if true, Uganda then has no government agency responsible for monitoring the human rights situation at a time when concerns about the situation are mounting.
While the report mentions the ineffectiveness of the judiciary and the difficulty of obtaining a fair trial, it does not discuss the government's apparent lack of commitment to the "establishment of an independent criminal justice system. The New York City Bar Association, in recommending that greater resources be allocated to the improvement of the existing legal system and civil police, recognized the
389
Uganda
difficult economic situation confronting the Ugandan government but said that "it is plain from a review of the government's budget that the criminal justice system is given an unjustifiably low priority in the allocation of resources."
Concerns about Uganda's human rights situation are being voiced more frequently. In addition to those raised by the New York City Bar Association, Amnesty International and the Uganda Law Society, in June the Roman Catholic Bishops of Uganda released a statement condemning the Ugandan government for its human rights violations, saying "no self-respecting government can allow such actions to be done in its name." Western diplomats have recently indicated that they are losing patience with the slow progress the Ugandan government is making towards improving the human rights situation and in implementing democratic reforms. Yet the government reilises to acknowledge the problem, generally rejecting criticism for human rights violations. For example, the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General condemned Amnesty International's 1991 report as "unhelpful and uninformed . . . aimed at damaging the good record of the NRM government which is committed to the protection of human rights." This troubling governmental attitude goes unaddressed in the report.
In sum, while the State Department is to be commended for its description of human rights violations in Uganda, its 1991 report does not provide the necessary context for those who desire to know the direction in which Uganda is heading.
390
