 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni, elected to a 5-year term in 1996 under the 1995 Con-
 stitution, dominated the Government. He has ruled since 1986 through the National
 Resistance Movement (NRM), legislatively reorganized and renamed as "The Move-
 ment." The 1995 Constitution provided for a 276-member unicameral parliament
 and an autonomous, independently elected president. The Constitution formally ex-
 tended Uganda's one-party movement form of government for 5 years and severely
 restricted political party activities, with a national referendum on the role of mul-
 tile political parties scheduled for the year 2000 after a 1-year campaign period.
 Movement supporters remained in control in the Parliament, which was elected to
 a 5-year term in July 1996. Both the presidential and parliamentary elections were
 peaceful, orderly, and technically transparent; but election conditions, including re-
 strictions on political party activities, led to a flawed election process. The judiciary
 is generally independent, but understaffed and weak; the President has extensive
 legal and extralegal o wers.
 The Uganda Peple's Defense Force (UPDF) is the key security force. The Con-
 stitution maintains civilian control of the UPDF, with the President designated as
 commander-in-chief. The UPDF's demobilization program, which concluded in 1995,
 was partially reversed due to increasing instability in the north, and some soldiers
 were reactivated in 1996 to combat the rebels. UPDF soldiers and members of local
 defense units (LDU's) assist the police in rural areas, although the LDU's continued
 to operate without a legal mandate. The Internal Security Organization (ISO) re-
 mained under the direct authority of the President. Although the ISO is primarily
 an intelligence-gathering body, its operatives occasionally detained civilians. The
 UPDF, police, and LDU's committed human rights abuses.
 The economy grew at a rate of 5 percent during the fiscal year ending June 30.
 While the agriculturally based economy continued to rely on coffee as its chief ex-
 
 
 port, cotton and other agricultural exports continued to expand. Economic reforms
 encouraged investment, and the Government divested 13 parastatals. The Govern-
 ment introduced structural reforms in the banking industry and continued comner-
 cial law reform. In addition, the capital markets authority licensed a stock ex-
 change. The Government also made major investments in power, communications,
 and transport. However, foreign economic assistance accounted for approximately 29
 percent of government spending. Annual gross domestic product is about $250 per
 ne Government'sd human rights record remained the same, and there continued
 to be numerous, serious problems. Movement domination of the political process lim-
 its the rights of citizens. Security forces used excessive force, at times resulting in
 death. Government forces committed or failed to prevent some extrajudicial killings
 of suspected rebels and civilians. Police, UPDF, and LDU forces regularly bat and
 sometimes tortured suspects, often to force confessions. There were numerous cases
 in which the Government detained and charged U.PDF and LDU members for
 human rights abuses. However, despite measures to improve the discipline and
 training of security forces, and despite the punishment of some security force offi-
 cials guilty of abuses, security force abuses remained a problem throughout the
 country.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Members of the security
 forces sometimes arbitrarily arrest and detain citizens. Prolonged pretrial detention
 remained a problem. Poor judicial administration, lack of resources, a large case
 backlog, and lengthy trial delays circumscribed due process and the right to a fair
 trial. The Government continued to cooperate with nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) on legal and prison reforms. The UPDF at times infringed on citizens' pri-
 vacy rights. Athough independent newspapers generally published freely, _the Gov-
 ernment at times restricted freedom of speech and the press in practice. The Gov-
 erinent dominated the media and occasionally resorted to outdated laws on sedi-
 tion and criminal libel or employed other means of press harassment, including im-
 prisonment. This led some journalists to practice self-censorship. The UPDF contin-
 ued to censor press reports about the northern insurgencies. in September the Gov-
 ernment resumed administration of Movement political education courses, which
 had been suspended in 1995 to avoid interference with the elections. The Govern-
 ment restricts freedom of assembly and association, and the 1995 Constitution ex-
 tended previously existing restrictions on political activity for an additional 5 years,
 effectively limiting these rights further. However, the Government continued efforts
 to improve representation in the political process of "marginalized" groups, includ-
 ing women and people with disabilities. Discrimination against women, people with
 disabilities, and ethnic minorities persists. Domestic violence, rape, and abuse of
 children remained serious problems. The Government worked with NGO's to combat
 the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM). Child labor, especially in the infor-
 mal sector, is widespread.
 Insurgent forces committed numerous serious abuses. The Lord's Resistance Army
 (LRA), led by Joseph Kony, continued to kill, torture, maim, rape, and abduct large
 numbers of civilians, virtually enslaving numerous children. Although its activities
 diminished sharply late in the year, the West Nile Bank Front (WNBF) also com-
 mitted killings, as did the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group active in
 western Uganda.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTflS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 politically motivated killings by government forces. In a widely publicized incident
 in June, however, a leading organizer for the Democratic Party (DP), Modest a
 Kabaranga Akiiki, was shot, then burned to death in her home with her mother.
 After an investigation assisted by the President's security staff, a suspect in the
 murder was arrested; the motive for the murders was unclear at year's end, but
 many DP leaders believed that it was political.
 In the course of official operations, police, UPDF, and LDU personnel sometimes
 used excessive force, result in deaths. In particular, UPDF units in the north re-
 portedly engaged in isolated executions of suspected rebels. In February a civilian
 was reportedly beaten to death by two LDUmembers at their headquarters in
 Masaka; the perpetrators were reportedly arrested. In March a group of UPDF sol-
 diers allegedly used a sledgehammer to batter to death four suspected highway rob-
 bers. In May a robbery suspect was tortured to death by UPDF officers (see Section
 1.e.). In June an elderly man was reportedly beaten to death by two UPDF sodiers
 
 
 364
 who had arrested him on suspicion that his son was an LRA rebel. In July police
 in Ntungamo reportedly beat a suspect to death (see Section 1.c.).
 Harsh conditions, some intentional mistreatment, and lack of adequate medical
 treatment caused many deaths in prisons (see Section 1.c.). In February prison
 guards beat an inmate to death in Apac district.
 Muslim groups also complained of extensive mistreatment by security officials in
 the west. On August 28, unidentified persons shot and killed Abdullah Buwuula, a
 Muslim barber in Kasese district who had publicly protested harassment by govern-
 ment security operatives. Two other Muslims, Mubarak Mawejie (previously ar-
 rested by UPDF personnel suspicious of a meeting in his home) and Amir Sinai,
 were also reportedly killed in Kasese district in Aug st under suspicious cir-
 cumstances. There no were no reports of investigations by government agencies of
 the three killings.
 A Gulu-based human rights group, Human Rights Focus, released a report in Feb-
 ruary that alleged 35 extrajuicial killings by the military forces, most of which oc-
 curred in previous years.
 The policeman arrested in June 1995 for killing a striker at the Lugazi Sugar
 Corporation died while released on bail.
 Vigilante justice was a problem (also see Sections 1.c. and 5).
 Authorities rarely prosecuted persons engaged in mob violence, which on occasion
 resulted in death. In June irate mourners at the burial of an LDU guard in Soroti
 overpowered police and lynched the suspected killers. In separate incidents in Sep-
 tember, two suspected burglars caught by a mob in a Kampala suburb were
 "necklaced" with motor vehicle tires and burned to death. Villagers in Kyarumba
 beat to death a suspected child abuser in August (see Section 5).
 The rebel LRA was responsible for the killing of numerous civilians, including
 children (see Section 1.g.). LRA forces particularly targeted local government offi-
 cials and employees, especially teachers; over 100 teachers were killed during the
 insurgency in Kitgum district alone. The WNBF and the ADF also committed
 extrajudicial killings (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 due to action by government forces.
 Numerous local officials and local government employees were abducted by the
 LRA during the year; the whereabouts of some of the abductees remains unknown.
 (see Section 1.g.).
 In addition, the LRA abducted hundreds of school-age children, reportedly for in-
 doctrination in Sudan as LRA guerrillas, for sale as slaves in Sudan, or for sexual
 purposes. While some of those abducted later escaped or were recaptured, the
 whereabouts of many children remained unresolved at year's end. The ADF rebel
 group in the west also abducted numerous civilians, including some students; the
 whereabouts of a number of these abductees remain unknown.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits "any form of torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment or punishment." However, security forces commonly beat and sometimes tor-
 tured suspected criminals, often to force confessions. In December participants at a
 workshop sponsored by the African Center for Rehabilitation and Treatment of Tor-
 ture Victims (ACTV) ranked the police as the most common users of torture, fol-
 lowed by prisons, the army, and local councils. In January operatives of the ISO re-
 portedly beat people in Nakawa estate near Kampala, while ostensibly searching for
 criminals. Also in January, police in Kibale beat 20 Muslims suspected of being F
 supporters (see Section 2.c.). In May Paul Kollo, a suspected armed robber, died in
 a police cell in Gulu apparently due to torture, just after being handed over to police
 by UPDF officers. In July the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) began
 an investigation in a case in which a UPDF soldier, Corporal Twaha Kabushera,
 was paralyzed after torture during military detention. In August, 18 UPDF soldiers
 in Gulu district, including their unit commander, were arrested for allegedly beating
 21 civilians after failing to apprehend a reported deserter. In July Stephen
 Baryakaijuka died after allegedly being severely beaten by police in Ntungamo, re-
 portedly on orders of the district police commander. In August Kasese police tor-
 tured a Muslim detainee, then released him without charge the next day (see Sec-
 tion 5). A report by the International Committee of the Re, Crss (ICRC) in Septem-
 ber accused officers in the Kampala central police station of beating and mistreating
 suspects. In October attorneys for several suspects charged that their clients had
 been tortured (see Section i.e.).
 LDU's, which frequently lack training, are guilty more often than police of mis-
 treatment of prisoners and detainees. Although they have no authority to make ar-
 rests, LDU's continued to do so. Bosco Opira, a 15-year-old boy residing in Paicho
 in Kitgum county, was reportedly tortured in May by having plastic utensils melted
 
 
 on his body by LDU members who arrested him for illegal possession of a gun. In
 another case, a contract security guard in Kampala was arrested at his home with-
 out warrant by an LDU unit on suspicion of involvement in a burglary, beaten, and
 delivered to a police station-where a quick investigation easily determined that he
 had been on duty at a diplomatic residence when the crime occurred.
 The Government investigated some cases of abuse, trying and punishing some of-
 fenders. In January, three police officers in Jinja were reportedly arrested after al-
 legedly torturing a local businessman, Charles Kasajia. In Febrary, two LDU mem-
 bers were arrested after allegedly bating a civilian to death at the LDU district
 headquaers in Masaka. In April, six polie officers were arrested in Busia near
 the Kenya border for allegedly shooting a suspected robber on April 20; at year's
 end, the officers were detained on remand pending investigations.
 WPDF mobile forces reportedly beat civilians brutally and raped women (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.). The Human Rights Focus report issued in February alleged 11 instances
 of rape by LDU's, most of which occurred in previous years.
 There were numerous instances in which mobs attacked suspected thieves and
 other offenders caught in the commission of crimes (also see Section L.a.). Often mo-
 tivated by widespread distrust of the justice system, these mobs engaged in stoning,
 beatings, and other forms of mistreatment, such as tying suspects' wrists and ankles
 together behind their backs, stripping suspects of their clothes and parading them
 through the streets, or forcing suspects to hop painfully on the sides of their ankles.
 In Febru     angry residents of Nyabwina village in Kabarole district reportedly
 beat a local official caught with the wife of a suspect whom he had arrested.
 The LRA continued to maim and rape civilians. The ADF also committed rapes
 (see Section 1.g.).
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Conditions for the esti-
 mated 5,000 inmates in local police cells, generally worse than those in the prisons
 themselves, were characterized in a report by the government-sponsored Uganda
 Human Rights Commission (UHRC) as "degrading and inhuman." There are two ci-
 vilian prison systems: One is state-funded and operated by the Ministry of Internal
 Affairs; a second is run at the local administration level, under the auspices of the
 Ministry of Local Government. Conditions are particularly harsh in the 133 local
 prisons, which received no central government funding. Although the law states that
 civilians are never to be held in military barracks, civilians continued to be detained
 in barracks, often without trial. Both civilian and military prisons have high mortal-
 ity rates from overcrowding, diseases spread by unsanitary conditions, malnutrition,
 and HIV/AIDS.
 No accurate estimates are available on the number of deaths due to harsh condi-
 tions and lack of medical care, although the UHRC reported severely inadequate
 medical services, seriously unhygienic conditions, and a "situation of semi-starva-
 tion" of prisoners in many prisons. In August, 10 inmates reportedly died of hunger
 and mistreatment at Morukatipe prison near Tororo. A total of 57 prisoners report-
 edly died in Arua prison during the year, in many cases allegedly from food short-
 ages and poor medical care. In December the officer in charge of Arua prison was
 placed on forced leave pending investigation of the deaths. In February, nine prison
 guards were reportedly arrested by authorities for beating a prisoner to death in
 a prison in Apac district. The predominant cause of death among prisoners was
 HI/AIDS, which reportedly affected 18 percent of the inmates at Luzira central
 prison near Kampala. The uniforms and bedding stipulated by law are rarely pro-
 vided, although there is evidence that some wardens do attempt to obtain these
 items for inmates.
 Harsh conditions largely result from the Government's seriously inadequate fund-
 ing of prison facilities. The centrally funded prisons are sufficiently 'organized to
 grow maize, millet, cassava, beans, eggplant, carrots, and other crops, although the
 UHIRC accused prison farms of overworking inmates, who often received only $.001
 (1 Ugandan shilling) per day for their labor. Prison conditions come closest to inter-
 national norms in Kampala, where prisons provide medical care, running water, and
 sanitation. On the other hand, these centrally funded prisons are the most over-
 crowded. By one estimate, the country's centrally funded prisons-all of which pre-
 date independence in 1962--currently hold about three times their maximum
 planned capacity. Despite an order by the chief magistrate in June 1996 that all
 judges visit a prison, few complied with the order. Human rights groups, especially
 theluganda Law Reform Commission, continued to lobby for expanded noncustodial
 sentencing-an effort generally blocked by strongly punitive attitudes among judges,
 in part motivated by fear of accusations of corruption if prisoners appear leniently
 treated. Although the law provides for access to prisoners by families, ignorance of
 this right, and fear of prison authorities, often limit family visits. The UHRC noted
 
 
 366
 
 allegations it had received that officers in charge of police cells sometimes de-
 manded bribes to allow visits.
 Women have segregated wings in the prisons, with female staff. According to
 human rights advocates, rape is not generally a problem, although female prisoners
 also suffer from severely substandard conditions. Due to lack of space in juvenile
 facilities, juveniles are often kept in prison with adults. The central prison system
 maintains one juvenile prison and two lower security reformatory halls. School fa-
 cilities and health clinics in all three institutions are defunct; prisoners as young
 as age 12 perform manual labor from dawn until dusk, and administrators reported
 in October that one institution with a capacity of 45 children actually held 173; no
 records were available for most of these children.
 The central prison system in 1996 launched a 3-year program to improve prison
 buildings, water and sanitation systems, food, and uniforms. Most of the items used
 in this program, which benefited 12 of the 46 centrally administered prisons in
 1997, are made within the prison system itself.
 Government agencies have sponsored or participated in numerous conferences on
 the justice system and prison conditions, including a 2 day conference in Kampala
 in September. Government agencies also worked closely with international and in-
 digenous human rights organizations on prison reform efforts. Revision of the pris-
 ons act, which provides the legal basis for prison management, began in 1996 and
 was still pending at year's end, as were proposals to integrate local prisons with the
 central prison system.
 Media access to prisons remained limited, but the Government permitted full ac-
 cess to prisons by the ICRC and local NGO's, principally the Foundation for Human
 Rights Initiative (FHRI) and the Uganda Prisoners' AidFoundation (UPAF). In Au-
 gust military authorities granted the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)
 access to military places of detention. As far as known, the UHRC did not avail it-
 self of this access before the end of the ear, it has issued no reports on such visits.
 Prison authorities require advance notilcation of visits, a process that is often sub-
 ject to administrative delays.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Members of the security forces at times
 arbitrarily arrested and detained citizens. According to the Constitution, a suspect
 must be charged within 48 hours of arrest and be-brought to trial or released on
 bail within 120 days (360 days for a capital offense)-unless the case has been com-
 mitted to the court before the expiration of this period, when pretrial detention is
 not constitutionally limited. The Constitution also provides that detainees should
 immediately be informed of the reasons for their detention. In practice, however, the
 authorities enforced none of these requirements. Other laws, such as the Public
 Order and Security Act of 1967 (the Detention Order), provide for unlimited deten-
 tion without charge but these laws have never been formally invoked by the Govern-
 ment. Legal and human rights groups, including the UHRC, sharply criticized the
 excessive length of detention without trial-in many cases amounting to several
 years-for alleged offenses under other laws, which beth violated the constitutional
 rights of the detainees and contributed substantially to prison overcrowding.
 Arbitrary arrest, while not common, does occur. In particular, some Muslim orga-
 nizations complained of arrests targeted at young Muslims on suspicion that they
 supported rebel groups. Group arrests in "dragnet" operations were also reporte,
 such as detention of over 80 people in Kampala in March in a crackdown on bur-
 glary. Police arrested 50 persons, including street children, in an effort directed
 against vagabonds in FortPortal in January. In general those detained in such op-
 erations who had identification papers and did not have criminal records were re-
 leased. ISO operatives occasionally detained civilians.
 Although they have no legal authority to make arrests, LDU's continued to arrest
 citizens.
 Some incidents of apparently politically motivated arrests were reported. In Au-
 gust a member of the Uganda Young Democrats, the youth wing of the DP, report-
 ediy was arrested and detained for 3 weeks, then released, for what police called
 politicizing and inciting youths against the Government. In addition, some members
 of the DP and the Uganda People's Congress (UPC), were detained for short periods
 of time, apparently without legal authority, for selling party cards. During the year,
 the Government charged over 1,000 persons with treason and related crimes, and
 the cases of many others charged for political offenses remain pending (see Section
 i.e.). The February report of Human Rights Focus alleged 47 cases of unlawful ar-
 rest by the PDF and 9 by the police, most of which occurred in' previous years.
 While the number of political detainees is unknown, it is believed to be small.
 Pretrial detainees comprise nearly three-fourths of the prison population. At
 year's end, there were 13,500 prisoners in the central prison system, of whom 5,500
 had been convicted, and 8,000 were in pretrial detention (remand). Congestion and
 
 
 367
 delay in the legal system have produced similar figures for several years, although
 both categories increased substantially over the previous year. At the local level, the
 situation is far worse. Most of the approximately 4,000 local prisoners have not yet
 had a fair trial. Civilians detained in military barracks are almost invariably de-
 prived of a fair, civilian trial. The actual number of such detainees are unknown,
 but there are believed to be fewer than in local prisons. Efforts to verify these condi-
 tions were reportedly hampered by intentional concealment of detained civilians.
 Verification of the situation in military facilities is difficult; however, in August the
 UHRC was granted access to military places of detention (see Section 1.c.). Across
 all types of prisons, the average time in pretrial detention is from 2 to 3 years.
 The Government did not use exile as a means of political control. A presidential
 amnesty for former LRA and WNBF rebels remains in effect, although those who
 return risk capture and violence by mobs or the UPDF.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, the President has extensive legal and extralegal powers that may
 influence the exercise of this independence. However, in its first decision, the Con-
 stitutional Court in April ruled unanimously against the Government in a case in-
 volving the military status of a prominent officer, Major General David Tinyefuza;
 at year's end, the case was on appeal to the Supreme Court. The President nomi-
 nates, for the approval of Parliament, members of the Judicial Service Commission,
 which makes recommendations on appointments to the High Court, the Court of Ap-
 peal, and the Supreme Court. The judiciary also is understaffed and weak; at year's
 end, only 16 of the 30 positions in the three senior federal courts were filled.
 The highest court is the Supreme Court, followed by (in descending order) the
 Court of Appeal (which also functions as the "Constitutional Court" for cases of first
 instance involving constitutional issues), the High Court, the chief magistrate's
 court, local council (LC) 3 (subcounty), LC 2 (parish), and LC 1 (village). A minimum
 of six justices may sit on the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal/Constitutional
 Court. Although once considered a useful innovation, the LC courts are now often
 thought to be sources of injustice due to such factors as bribery and male dominance
 in rural areas. In addition there are a few specialized courts to deal with industrial
 or other matters. The Industrial Court (IC), which arbitrates labor disputes, is
 structurally parallel to the chief magistrate's court.
 At the lower end of the judicial system, the local village councils have the author-
 ity to settle civil disputes, including land ownership and payment of debts. These
 courts, often the only ones available to villagers, frequently exceed their authority
 by hearing criminal cases, including murder and rape. LC decisions may be ap-
 pealed to magistrate's courts, but often there are no records made of the case at the
 village level, and many defendants are not aware of their right to appeal. The civil-
 ian judicial system contains procedural safeguards, including the granting of bail
 and appeals to higher courts.
 The right to a fair trial has been circumscribed for many years by an inadequate
 system of judicial administration and lack of resources, resulting in a serious back-
 log of cases. The courts, like other branches of government, were impaired by a 4-
 year-long civil service hiring freeze, now somewhat relaxed, which was exacerbated
 during the year by budget cuts of up to 30 percent in many ministries. As a result,
 criminal cases may take 2 years or more to reach the courts. The case backlog re-
 mains huge; in particular, the backlog of criminal cases in the high court has in-
 creased every year since 1993. Some courts, however, began in 1966 to adhere to
 the constitutionally prescribed limits on pretrial detention. For example, Kampala
 businessman Joseph Lusse, who had been arrested in April 1995 and charged with
 treason, was released on bail by High Court justice J.M. P.Tabaro, who ruled that
 Lusse's lenghy stay in prison on remand violated his constitutional right to bail.
 Many defendants cannot afford legal representation. The Constitution requires
 that the Government provide an attorney for indigent defendants accused of capital
 offenses, but there is rarely enough money to retain adequate counsel. The Uganda
 Law Society (ULS) operates legal aid clinics in four regional offices. It assists mili-
 tary defendants as well as civilians. The Uganda Association of Women Lawyers
 (FIDA) and the FHRI also practice public-interest law from offices in Kampala.
 The military court system does not assure the right to a fair trial. Although the
 accused has the right to legal counsel, military defense attorneys are often un-
 trained and may be assigned by the military command, which also appoints the
 prosecutor and the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military court,
 which may invoke the death penalty, may be appealed to the high command, but
 not to the High or Supreme Courts. In 1995 the ULS petitioned the Government
 to address the lack of an appeals process in the military courts; in October a court-
 martial of appeal was established.
 
 
 368
 The Government continued to arrest and charge persons for treason, especially
 captured rebel fighters in numbers greater than the judicial system could manage.
 In the past, numerous human rights abuses were committed in connection with
 treason cases, including political detentions, detentions without charge, and mis-
 treatment of prisoners. In a notable case, the High Court in April released two trea-
 son suspects on bail due to the judicial system's failure to prosecute in a case that
 had begun in 1992 and had received six adjournments. In another case, attorneys
 for four Sudanese citizens and four Ugandans charged in October with levying war
 against the Government and treason, respectively, claimed that their clients had
 been tortured and denied medical treatment. During the year, the Government
 charged over 1,000 .persons with treason and related crimes, in addition to at least
 196 pending cases i various stages of the legal process. Most were cases in which
 persons were accused of attempting to overthrow the Government. Some 111 per-
 sons arrested in 1995 on treason charges for attempting to establish a rebel training
 camp in Buseruka remain in custody, and their cases have been pending with the
 High Court since July 1996; two persons in this group died in prison during the
 year. The case of the six Sudanese rebels charged with treason remained in the
 High Court, as did the cases of two UPDF soldiers, Lt. David Kibirige and Capt.
 Muses Lubega, arrested for treason in 1995. Francis Kilama, charged with treason
 in 1995, remains in pretrial detention pending plice investigation. Several persons
 previously charged with treason, in addition to businessman Joseph Lusse, were re-
 leased after dismissal of the charges, in some instances for procedural reasons.
 The number of political prisoners is unknown but believed to be small. Bright
 Gabula Africa, whose death sentence for treason was upheld by the Supreme Court
 in 1995, remains imprisoned pending the outcome of his appeal to the Advisory
 Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy, a largely anonymous constitutional body
 that recommends whether presidential clemency powers should be exercised in a
 given case. According to the authorities, no executions for treason or for any other
 crime occurred during the year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the protection of privacy, which the Government generally
 observes. The law requires that police have search warrants before entering private
 homes or offices, and the police generally observed this law in practice, although in
 its effort to combat the rebel movement in the north, the UPDF often invaded pri-
 vate homes without warrants. LDU's arrest citizens without authority; an LDU unit
 in Kampala arrested a suspect in his home and beat him (see Section 1.c.) UPDF
 forces in the north also allegedly beat civilians and confiscated civilian property,
 such as cattle. The police sometimes searched vehicles without prior warrants. Pris-
 on officials routinely censor the mail of prisoners.
 During the conflict with the LRA, government forces used threats to compel citi-
 zens to leave their homes and move to areas under government protection (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Reports of violations of humanitarian law increased. In the north, govern-
 ment forces implemented a policy of concentrating inhabitants in so-called "pro-
 tected villages" with UPDF detachments nearby as a means of protecting them and
 denying support to the LRA. Most inhabitants moved to the protected villages vol-
 untarily, but many were coerced by military authorities who told them that they
 would be treated as rebel supporters if they did not move. The villages, which were
 established hastily and without coordination with civil authorities, lacked appro-
 priate water and electrical supplies as well as health and educational services; they
 were rapidly beset by hunger and disease, which killed numerous residents. This
 policy was strongly attacked by parliamentarians from the area. A parliamentary
 committee report in January noted that while the policy "may appear necessary and
 successful" from "a security point of view," from "a humanitarian angle it has so
 far proved a disaster." Toward year's end, some residents began returning to their
 farms, while international assistance improved somewhat the condition of remaining
 village inhabitants. In other incidents, UPDF mobile forces reportedly routinely beat
 civilians brutally during questioning about rebel activities in the vicinity; some re-
 ports suggested that they raped villagers.
 In the north, forces of the IRA led by Joseph Kony, and supported by the Govern-
 ment of Sudan, regularly attacked civilian and military targets, as well as Sudanese
 refugee camps. These attacks caused widespread death and destruction of homes"
 and property and disrupted both economic and social life over much of Gulu and
 Kitgum districts. The  A continued to kill, maim, rape, and abduct large numbers
 of civilians. In particular, the LRA abducted numerous children and, at clandestine
 bases, terrorized them into virtually slavery as guards, concubines, and soldiers. An
 Amnesty International report on the practice in September concluded that without
 
 
 369
 abductions of children the LRA would have few combatants. A Human Rights Watch
 report in September estimated that 3,000 to 5,000 children had escaped from LRA
 captivity over the last 2 years and an equal number remained in LRA bands. A
 similar report by the U.N. Chldren's Fund (UNICEF) in May provided a somewhat
 lower estimate of abductions. In the largest massacre of the northern war, between
 January 7 and January 12, LRA units assaulted numerous villages in northwest
 Kitgum district, hacking and clubbing to death some 412 men, women, and children.
 In other incidents, LRA units killed or maimed persons traveling on roads, using
 bicycles, or keeping pigs--all of which violated LRA "rules." Such extrajudicial
 killings ocurre frequently. LRA rebels also planted land mines on roads in Gulu
 and Kitgum district throughout the year. An LRA mine killed the wife of the Angli-
 can bishop of Kitgum in May. Land mines on the few roads to the Sudan border
 hinder the transport of food to internally displaced persons (IDP's) and to the
 150,000 to 200,000 Sudanese refugees in camps there.
 In the northwestern region bordering Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
 Congo, the WNBF similarly laid land mines on major roads used for relief ship-
 ments to refugee camps as well as for local commerce. WNBF forces, however, were
 depleted by combat in southern Sudan against the Sudan People's Liberation Army
 (SPLA), and WNBF activities largely ceased by year's end.
 Another rebel group, the ADF, was active in the west and southwest during the
 year. The ADF engaged in wide-scale abuse of civilians, including killing, rape, and
 abduction. After an ADF attack in Bundibugyo district in June was turned back,
 residents found the bodies of some 58 civilians murdered -by the ADF. In addition
 more than 50 civilians were killed in ADF attacks in Kasese district in September
 and October. ADF elements also planted land mines extensively and engaged in nu-
 merous attacks on civilian locations, causing scores of deaths and injuries. Like -the
 LRA, the ADF targeted local officials for abduction and murder.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, but the Government at times restricted these rights in practice.
 The media were dominated by the New Vision, a government-funded daily news-
 paper with a circulation of 40,000 (with up to 10 readers sharing each copy) and
 a government-controlled Radio Uganda. These news sources were of a fairly high
 quality and often included reporting critical of the Government. The Government's
 occasional use of outdated sedition laws and imprisonment of some members of the
 media led some journalists to practice self-censorship. During the 1996 election cam-
 paigns, the New Vision exhibited a clear pro-NRM editorial bias and gave more
 prominent attention to NRM supporters running for office.
 The media are generally free and outspoken, with widespread availability of rival
 nongoverment publications. The independent Monitor newspaper equaled the New
 Vision's circulation while another major independent, The Crusader, which began
 publication in 1995, continued to publish and improve its credibility. The East Afri-
 can, a Nairobi-based weekly publication that provides extensive reporting on Ugan-
 da, continued to circulate without government hindrance.
 Editor Teddy Seezi Cheeye of the outspoken biweekly, Uganda Confidential, was
 acquitted in January of charges of having kidnaped a woman for sexual purposes.
 In dismissing the case, Kampala chief magistrate Mrs. Flavia Munaaba declared
 that the charges were "a frameup engineered by powerful and corrupt people" whom
 Cheeye, known for his efforts against government corruption, had long been criticiz-
 ing. Although the New Vision called for an investigation of the prosecution, the Gov-
 ernment in February appealed the dismissal. At year's end, no hearing date had
 been set.
 Haruna Kanaabi, editor of the weekly newsletter Shariat, appealed to the High
 Court his 1995 conviction for sedition and publishing false news, which was based
 on an article in Shariat that claimed that Rwanda was actually the 40th district
 of Uganda. At that time, Kanaabi was sentenced to 5 months' imprisonment.
 In January journalist Muasazi-Namiti was arrested on charges arising from arti-
 cles that he had published about the activities of Hassan Kato. Muasazi-Namiti re-
 ported that Kato had had sexual relations with over 1,000 women--one of whom,
 named in the articles, was the wife of a local government leader. Both Muasazi-
 Namiti and Kato were arrested and charged with disseminating false information.
 Hearings in the case began in September. In another case, Amos Kajoba, the editor
 of the UPC publication The People was detained for 7 hours in Kampala in April
 in connection with a criminal libel case for allegedly "exposing a Member of Par-
 liament to hatred."
 Other instances of press harassment also occurred. In October editor Charles
 Onyango-Obbo and senior reporter Andrew M. Mwanda of the Monitor newspaper
 
 
 370
 were arrested and charged with dissemination of false information based on a report
 that they published stating that Uganda had received gold in payment for assist-
 ance in overthrowing former Zairian leader Mobutu Sese Seko. In response to their
 appeal, a High Court judge sharply reduced the amount of their bail, from about
 $4,000 (4 million shillings) to $400 (400,000 shillings). At years end, the journalists
 remained released on bail and trial was pending.  n February editors of the Mon-
 itor were questioned by the police for more than 2 hours concerning articles that
 had allegedly angered President Museveni. In April the editor of the Lira-based
 Rupiny news aper, a sister publication of the New Vision, was held for 1 hour for
 allegedly publishing negative reports about Lira municipality.
 The Government controls one television station and Radio Uganda, the radio sta-
 tion with the largest audience. There are four local television stations, six local
 radio stations, and five private television stations available by satellite. Uncensored
 Internet access is widely available through three commercial service providers in
 major citiesj although its price was prohibitive for all but the most affluent non-
 institutional users.
 The Government sometimes abridged freedom of speech of those who questioned
 government policies. In March a walk supported by a spectrum of Christian leaders,
 including the Roman Catholic Metropolitan Emmanuel Cardinal Wamala, intended
 to call for a pacefuil solution to the conflict in the north, was postponed under pres-
 sure from the President. The march took place in November without further govern-
 ment interference. In May the inspector general of police forbade a demonstration
 against a number of government policies supported by some opposition-minded
 Members of Parliament (M.P.'s). While authorities sought to j ustify this action on
 the grounds that its sponsors purportedly might be contemplating violence, com-
 ments by government leaders after these events suggested tUat the saw content-
 based discrimination in treatment of demonstrations as appropriate. Members of op-
 position political parties complained that ISO authorities kept their meetings under
 constant surveillance, intimidating their supporters. A member of the youth wing
 of the DP reportedly was arrested an detained for what police called politicizing
 and inciting youths against the Government (see Section 1.d.).
 The press and media law, which took effect in 1995, requires journalists to be li-
 censed and to meet certain standards, including holding a university degree. The
 law provides for a Media Council to monitor and discipline journalists. The law also
 gives the Government power to suspend newspaprs and to deny access to state in-
 formation. Although the Media Council was established in 1996, government offi-
 cias do not vigorously enforce the law, both for practical and political reasons.
 The Uganda Journalists Safety Committee, a media watchdog group, filed suit in
 the Consiti  onal Court in June against the sedition laws and the press and media
 law. The High Court began hearings in late November on the suit, which claimed
 that the laws violated a number of constitutional provisions; final action was still
 pending at year's end.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at the two public and five pri-
 vate universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or publica-
 tion. Students and faculty have sponsored wide-ranging political debates in open fo-
 rums on campus, including an interdisciplinary conference on human rights in the
 Great Lakes region at Makerere University in December. At the same time, some
 limits were evident. Makerere University, the most important institution of higher
 education, cautioned staff member Mohammed Mayanja, a former presidential can-
 didate, about remarks which he made that were critical of President Museveni, who
 is also the university chancellor.
 In the past, the Government required many students and government officials to
 take NRM political education and military science courses known as "Chaka
 Mchaka." These courses were criticized as indoctrination in NRM political philoso-
 phy, including the view that political parties were responsible for the country's civil
 conflicts before 1986. There were reports that the techniques used in some of the
 courses included intimidation, physical and mental abuse, and sexual harassment.
 The Chaka Mchaka courses, suspended in 1995 to avoid interference with the elec-
 tral prcess, were revived in the latter part of the year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government restricts this right in practice. The Con-
 stitution bans politica parties from holding national conventions, issuing platforms,
 endorsing candidates, or opening branch offices outside the capital for 5 years. The
 Constitution also forbids other activities that would interfere with "the Movement
 stem," an elastic provision that the Government often interpreted adversely to po-
 tical parties' interests.
 There were no known cases of denial of assembly permits to other groups during
 the year.
 
 
 371
 In March the President exerted pressure to prevent a march in favor of a peaceful
 solution to the conflict in the north, and in May a senior police official forbade a
 demonstration by some opposition-minded M.P.'s. (see Section 2.a.). Members of op-
 position parties reported constant ISO surveillance of their meetings (see Section
 2.a.).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but the Government restricts
 this right in practice. NGO's are required to register with the Nongovernmental Or-
 ganizations Board, which includes representation from the Ministry of Internal Af-
 fairs as well as other ministries. The Government generally approves NGO registra-
 tion, although there have been instances in which NGO's considered to be opposed
 to the Government politically have encountered serious difficulties in obtaining reg-
 istration.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution protects freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. There is no state religion. Prisoners are
 given the opportunity to pray on the day a propriate to their faith. Muslim pris-
 oners are usually released from work duties during the month of Ramadan.
 A number of incidents, however, demonstrated hostility against Muslims by some
 government officials, in part because of support by some Muslims of rebel groups,
 especially of the ADF, (see Section L.a.). In January during the month of Ramadan,
 three police officers pursued a suspect into Nakasero mosque during night prayers.
 Also in January, a security officer in Kibale district entered the mosque in Muhooro
 town during night prayers, ejected the worshipers at gunpoint while accusing them
 of being ADF supporters, and detained 20 Muslims for 2 days in a local police post,
 where they were beaten by police. A local government official reportedly expressed
 regret for the incident. In the same month, security officers in Bushenyi town
 blocked a vehicle carrying relief supplies for Muslims in Kasese district; cir-
 cumstances suggested that the action, although purportedly based on lack of proper
 documentation, was motivated by anti-Muslim hostility. In February the Resident
 District Commissioner (RDC) of Bushenyi ordered the arrest of a Muslim who left
 a district meeting before the singing of the national anthem; reported remarks by
 the RDC suggested that the arrest was motivated by hostility to Muslims. In August
 Siraje Kifamunyanja, a Muslim businessman in Kasese, was reportedl arrested by
 district security officers .t his attorney's office, tortured at district ofices, and re-
 leased the following day without charge.
 In August members of the security forces were suspected of killing three Muslims
 in Kasese district (see Section l.a.). Muslim groups complained of numerous in-
 stances of harassment by security officers during the year, but there were no reports
 that government agencies investigated such incidents.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respected them in practice, although some local officials reportedly demanded
 payment of fees for permission to change a place of residence. A married woman
 needs to obtain her husband's written permission on her passport application if chil-
 dren are traveling on her passport.
 The Government cooperates with the Offie of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and with other humanitarian organizations in assisting refu-
 geeS. As it has repeatedly done in past years, Uganda continued to provide first asy-
 un to citizens from neighboring countries, extending this practice to approximately
 204,000 refugees during the year; most were from Sudan, but a smaller number
 were from other neighboring countries. The Government provided asylum, but not
 refugee status, to 2,000 to 3,000 Rwandans who had refugee status in Tanzania but
 entered Uganda to avoid repatriation to Rwanda. Most of the latter group returned
 to Rwanda by midyear. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a coun-
 try where they feared persecution.
 The Government provided increased security in refugee camps, and there were no
 reports of large scale attacks by rebel groups on the camps. Nevertheless, there
 were several instances of attacks, rapes, harassment, and looting directed against
 refugees, causing several serious injuries and deaths. In one incident in October,
 LA rebels abducted 24 refugees, subsequently releasing 22 and killing 2 (see Sec-
 tion l.g.).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Movement domination of the Government and the political process, and some re-
 strictive constitutional provisions, limited citizens' effective exercise of the right to
 change their government. The President dominates the Government, and Movement
 supporters control the Parliament. In addition, a constitutional provision prohibiting
 actions that impair the Movement system was interpreted by some local officials-
 
 
 372
 the vast majority of whom are Movement supporters-to forbid the sale of political
 party cards. Although no law makes such an action a criminal offense, a number
 of DP and UPC figures were arrested by police and held briefly while attempting
 to sell party cards. Local government elections, to be carried out under the "no-
 party" Movement system, began at village and parish levels in November and De-
 cember. They were expected to conclude in the first half of 1998. No national elec-
 tions took place during the year. Universal suffrage is accorded to adults 18 years
 of age and older. Contrary to the Constitution, the right to vote was denied to pris-
 oners. Special seats in Parliament are designated for members of the UPDF.
 Women play a prominent role in national affairs, but are underrepresented in gov-
 ernment and politics. However, the Government has used quotas in an aggressive
 effort to place women in positions of authority. The Vice President and the Deputy
 Speaker of Parliament are women. In addition, each of the nation's then 39 districts
 in 1996 elected a woman to Parliament to fill a seat reserved for women by provi-
 sions of the Constitution. Six other women won openly contested seats in the 276-
 member Parliament in that election.
 Provisions of the Local Government Bill, passed in March, reserved seats on local
 councils for women as well as members of other "marginalized" groups, such as dis-
 abled persons. The Constitution proves for five seats in Parliament for representa-
 tives of the disabled, and a by-election to fill one of these seats was actively con-
 tested.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous human rights groups operate. Among them are: The FHRI; the Uganda
 chapter of FIDA; the UPAF, which monitors prison conditions; the National Organi-
 zation for Civic Education and Election Monitoring, which deals with problems re-
 lated to civil society and political rights; Human Rights Focus, based in the north-
 ern town of Gulu; the National Association of Women's Organizations of Uganda
 (NAWOU), an umbrella group; and the Human Rights and Peace Center, based at
 Makerere University. These groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. HURINET, a human
 rights network and an umbrella orgaization for nine human rights organizations
 active in the country, continued to be active, and Amnesty International opened a
 branch office in Kampala while also forming a Uganda chapter.
 The Constitution established the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) as
 a permanent independent body with quasi-judicial powers. Under the Constitution,
 the Commission may subpoena information and order the release of detainees and
 the payment of compensation for abuses, but it may not intervene in cases pending
 before a court. The Commission began investigations of numerous alleged human
 rights abuses but by year's end had issued no rulings. The UHRC also inspected
 numerous detention facilities and publicly reported its findings. Government offi-
 cials were generally cooperative and responsive to NGO views. They frequently at-
 tended conferences and seminars hosted by NGO's on social problems. The Govern-
 ment allowed access by international human rights NGO's, the UNHCR, and the
 ICRC.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based On Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, Or
 Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on these factors, but the Govern-
 ment does not effectively enforce the law in matters of local or culturally accepted
 discrimination against women, children, people with disabilities, or certain ethnic
 groups. Race was not a factor in national politics. The escalating tension in the
 north led to violations of the rights of many Acholi, the ethnic group that comprises
 a significant part of the northern population.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, remained common. There were
 no laws passed to protect women against battery, although there is a general law
 concerning assault. In August, however, the Ministry of Gender and Community De-
 velopment began to implement the Children Statute, passed in 1966, which provides
 extensive protections for families and children. Public opinion and law enforcement
 officials continued to view wife beating as a man's prerogative and rarely intervened
 in cases of domestic violence. Women remained more likely to sue for divorce than
 to file assault charges against their husbands while still married. These problems
 received growing public attention, with numerous NGO's that advocate women's
 rights sponsoring conferences, empowerment sessions, and training programs
 throughout the country. These NGO's were particularly active in connection with a
 case in which an Asian woman, Renu Joshi, was allegedly murdered by relatives,
 
 
 373
 including her husband, Kooky Sharma, in December. At year's end, legal action in
 this case was pending.
 Traditional and widespread societal discrimination against women continued, es-
 pecially in rural areas, despite constitutional provisions to the contrary. Many cus-
 tomary laws discriminate against women in the areas of adoption, marriage, divorce,
 and devolution of property on death. In most areas, women may not own or inherit
 property, nor retain custody of their children under local customary law. Divorce
 law sets stricter evidentiary standards for women to prove adultery. Women do most
 of the agricultural work but own only 7 percent of the agricultural land. Since the
 implementation of the Constitution, foreign-born husbands of Ugandan women can
 become citizens. The previous law had allowed only men to sponsor their foreign
 spouses for citizenship. There are limits on a married woman's ability to travel
 abroad with her children (see Section 2.d.).
 There are active women's rights groups, including the FIDA, Action for Develop-
 ment the National Association o Women Judges of Uganda (NAWJ) and the
 NAWOU, which promote greater awareness of the rights of women and children.
 The FIDA is conducting a 3-year project to reform outdated and discriminatory
 laws, and the NAWJ completed and began disseminating a guidebook on women's
 rights and options concerning domestic violence.
 Children.-Although it has devoted only limited funds to children's welfare, the
 Government demonstrated a commitment to improving children's welfare. Beginning
 in August, it implemented the Children Statute, passed in 1996. The law stipulates
 parents' responsibilities and provides extensive protections for children in a wide va-
 riety of areas, including financial support, foster care placement, adoption, deter-
 mination of parentage, and treatment of children charged with offenses. It also in-
 cludes concise provisions on the rights of the child, including a provision that a child
 shall not bo "made to work or take p art in any activity whet her for pay or not which
 is likely to injure the child's health, education, mental, physical or moral develop-
 ment." Nevertheless, the large size of the youth population makes it difficult for the
 Government to enforce prohibitions on child labor (see Section 6.d.). One-half the
 population is under the age of 18. Current estimates, based on 1991 figures (the
 most recent available), suggest that there are 1.3 million orphaned children (chil-
 dren missing either parent are considered orphans). This large number of orphans
 results from previous civil wars, internal displacement of persons, and AIDS.
 Parliament passed legislation to put into effect a campaign promise by President
 Musevenm m 1996 to provide free education through seventh grade for a maximum
 of four children per family. This program, called "Universal Primary Education
 (UPE), received preferential treatment in the central government budget, although
 strained finances, instability in some areas, and inability to rapidly expand edu-
 cational personnel and infrastructure left the program incompletely implemented at
 year's end. Although the UPE began to make education more accessible financially,
 noteUPEas   edf~inancil p        fo the   n      arge ofte o   nousfa
 l uils a     b     theotll have eq cacces t
 cialeat       edctoa deiin-rmie             unler Parnts inbltgoafr
 sc oln  hab   te  p ast cor eae  hihl  wit  c hil  labo r (see  Secti n o  whdich
 (known loal  s"eieet        n     y a alracto ofhs icdt I      r eporedo
 esp  el whnte eretrti a    fail ember, nbr ksidficlfor teahrhsi  fe
 the c se e ccto nrec th     cts. eit  c onito    noluihmnua
 common Case wre rote brun        n nesaehu a        payen t t..Oneh the r'
 ppatioftn e nded the atero. Drespte testaes, baen ncreasignumer ofh
 cass receng prosecutd, sucs h a theate 3 ail20-yearodhanaed polrte setecedl
 after coiing ethem ian arecstiee Masakstrc. i aote case af 56-yeaol
 manuws ron vici Kapal intAril ofsamtceiement of aer-year-ol girl.
 anlwaenimpsned fol earson occsion lfcta inabpiantsmte ouy Pinma
 jusii      9 to allgedde ide fre exaein Ahug resietgad o f o Kyrma vilagin
 Man sorcholsen poral puishmentra, alug Minisera ofir Education"y
 Mush eiva nedeet teatmting ofe senda olestuent andgt calledofrgth
 astie ofieaces, whinolt cnomy Inroease, aiablt teacrail detpand o ae-
 edyating terondeat a1-rod pnrsrcuplf athBne prma choltl inplasakaedis-
 trct pbosutio wasvenlydingbsx at year's end Ine August a taher i n uampalowa
 frrsusnde apaed udrvsiation bnls asoed on amleos thave hade cand
 calr-eae pupil.         dcsosreanducla.Prnt'iaiit                     oafr
 
 
 374
 The 1996 cases of the Mpigi teacher charged with beating an 8-year-old child to
 death and the Bulegna headmaster charged with beating a 17-year-old girl to death
 remained unresolvea at year's end.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is practiced
 only by the Sabyni tribe, located in highly rural Kapchorwa district in eastern
 Uganda, whose members number fewer than 10,000. Among the Sabyni, initiation
 ceremonies involving FGM have been carried out every 2 years for girls between the
 ages of 14 and 16 years. There is no law against the practice, but government and
 women's groups working with the U.N. Fund for Population Activities are carrying
 out a program to combat the practice through education. With strong government
 support, including the support of local Kapchorwa leaders, a pilot phase of this pro-
 gram, which emphasizes close cooperation with local traditional authority figures
 and peer counseling, achieved more than a one-third reduction in numbers of muti-
 lationsperformed. The program is being expanded.
 The Children Statute provides that children with disabilities be treated and given
 necessary special facilities-a provision hampered in execution by inadequate fund-
 inj;he LRA abducted many children, using them as guards, soldiers, and concubines
 (see Section 1.g.)
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution specifies that persons with disabilities
 have a right to respect and human dignity" and requires that authorities take ap-
 propriat measures "to ensure that they realize their full mental and physical poten-
 tial." Regardless of this provision, there is no statutory requirement or government
 services or facilities such as accessibility of buildings for the disabled. Most build-
 ings are one-story, but in larger towns with multistory buildings, there are often no
 elevators and, even where they do exist, they are rarely reliable. Widespread dis-
 crimination by society and employers limits job and educational opportunities for
 those with physical disabilities. A small office for the disabled within the Ministry
 of Local G-overnment lacks sufficient funding. Disabled M.P.'s have emphasized the
 problems of people with disabilities.
 Religious Minorities.-A number of incidents demonstrated hostility against Mus-
 lims by residents of some localities. In February a mob in Igayaza village in Kibale
 strict destroyed a mosque belonging to the Tabliq Muslim sect and an Islamic pri-
 mary school.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Civil strife in the north led to violation of
 the rights of many members of the Acholi tribe, which is largely resident in the
 northern districts of Gulu and Kitgum. Both the LRA rebels-who themselves are
 largely Acholi-and government forces committed violations of humanitarian law,
 and LRA fighters were particularly implicated in instances of murder and maiming
 (see Section 1.g.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of every per-
 son to join associations or trade unions, and the law allows unionization if a major-
 ity of the work force supports it. In practice, the Government respects the. right to
 form unions, and since 1993 this right has extended to civil servants. However,
 many "essential" government employees are not permitted to form unions; these in-
 clude the police, army, permanent secretaries in the ministries, heads of depart-
 ments and state-owned enterprises, school principals, and other management level
 officials.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), the largest labor federation,
 includes 17 unions and is independent of the Government and political parties.
 Among its members are medical workers, including doctors, and the civil service
 union. The NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains marginal, since about
 90 percent of the work force consists of peasant farmers. Even in areas where cash
 crops are significant, unionization remained virtually nonexistent. In addition, the
 NOTU's membership has reportedly declined from some 500,000 in the 1970's to
 about 150,000. According to the 1988-89 census, about 20 percent of an estimated
 400,000 workers in the industrial or modern wage sector of the economy were union-
 ized.
 The Constitution confirms the right to strike, but government policy requires that
 labor and management make "every effort" to reconcile labor disputes before resort-
 ing to strike action. This directive presents unions with a complicated set of restric-
 tions. If reconciliation does not seem possible, labor must submit its grievances and
 notice to strike to the Minister of Labor, who usually delegates the dispute to the
 industrial court (IC). In February the IC upheld a 1993 pay increase award to em-
 ployees of three foreign-owned banks-the first prolabor ruling since President
 
 
 Museveni in 1995 expressed his displeasure with the IC's hostility toward the busi-
 ness community. In the absence of verdicts from the IC, the Minister of Labor gen-
 erally did not permit strikes, on the basis that "every effort" had not been ex-
 hausted. Frustrated laborers often went on strike anyway, protesting credibly that
 th   were not paid a living wage.
 Tere were 13 major strikes by both union and nonunion labor, including univer-
 sity staff, railway and medical workers, and sugar cane harvesters. There were also
 a number of shorter informal strikes by employees in particular localities or institu-
 tions, such as health workers or teachers, largely over unpaid salary; these actions
 usually were resolved quickly by payment of back wages. The Government respected
 the rights of striking workers once strikes began, but government officials threat-
 ened strikers at critical institutions, such as hospitals, with loss of their jobs. The
 police officer arrested in 1995 for killing a striker at the Lugazi Sugar Corporation
 died while the case was pending. The case of three union leaders of the Ugandan
 Medical Workers Association arrested in 1995 was dismissed by a Kampala court
 in January for failure to prosecute.
 Labor unions freely exercised the right to affiliate with and participate in regional
 and international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 to organize and bargain collectively, specifying that a workplace may be unionized
 if a majority of the employees supprts doing so. True collective bargaining, how-
 ever, takes place only in the small private sector of the modern economy. In the
 modern sector, the Government is by far the largest employer (civil service and
 state-owned enterprises) and it dominates the bargaining process. The Government
 has, however, adopted a tripartite (government-employers-labr) cooperative ap-
 proach to setting wages and resolving labor issues. Both the Government and em-
 ployers may refer disputes to the Industrial Court. The law does not prohibit
 antiunion discrimination by employers, and there were no reported incidents of gov-
 ernment harassment of union officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or bonded
 labor, including forced or bonded labor by children, but a lack of resources prevented
 the Government from enforcing this prohibition effectively. However, there is strong
 evidence that prison officials hired out prisoners to work on private farms and con-
 struction sites, where they were reportedly often overworked. Throughout the coun-
 try, prison officials routinely augmented their meager pay with crops grown by pris-
 oners on the prison grounds. Male prisoners performedarduous physical labor while
 female prisoners produced marketable handicrafts such as woven basketry. Com-
 pensation, when paid, was generally very low, although the law demands that pre-
 trial detainees must receive back pay for all work that they have performed, once
 they are released. The Government in January provided its 1995 report on the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention on Forced Labor; ILO had cited
 the Government for its failure to report in 1995 and 1996.
 The LRA abducted numerous children and terrorized them into virtual slavery as
 guards, soldiers and concubines (see Sections 1.b. and 1.g.).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, but a lack of resources prevented the
 Government from enforcing this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.). Employers
 are prohibited by law from hiring workers below the age of 18, but child labor is
 widespread. The Ministry of Social Services is charged with enforcing the law on
 child labor, but it has few resources to do so. Part of the problem is demographic,
 as half the population is under 18 years of age. School fees have made it impossible
 for many parents-particularly poor farmers, the majority of the population-to pro-
 vide their children with an education. As a result, there is an incentive to leave
 school and go into agricultural or domestic work in order to help meet expenses or
 perform the work of absent or infirm parents, a common situation throughout the
 country. About 55 percent of school-age children are in school.
 Most working children are employed in the informal sector, often on the subsist-
 ence farms of extended family members or as domestic servants. In urban areas,
 children peddle small items on the streets, are involved in commercial sex, or beg
 for money. Some of the largest sectors also employ child labor. Although most tea
 harvesting is done by adults, some children are also employed.
 Smuggling, one of the nation's larger informal industries, illegally employs large
 numbers of child laborers at the borders with Kenya and Tanzania. Children walk
 back and forth across the unguarded borders transporting small amounts of coffee,
 fuel, sugar, or other commodities.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government does not set a minimum
 wage, although a Minimum Wages Board appointed in 1995 submitted recommenda-
 
 
 tions on this issue to the Cabinet. Wages continued to be determined through nego-
 tiation between individuals and their employers, unions and proprietors, or through
 negotiation within the boards of directors at state-owned industries. Salaries are
 usually augmented by other incentives such as housing and transport allowances,
 which often equal base wages. The Ministry of Labor's salary scale for civil servants
 starts with unskilled labor at $50 (51,133 shillings) per month, up to supervisors
 at $400 (414,738 shillings) per month, plus modest increases for years worked. All
 include provisions for paid overtime. The higher end of this scale would provide
 minimal support for a worker and family, but most civil servants have great dif-
 ficulty earning enough money to pay their children's school costs. Many civil serv-
 ants and their dependents -work in second jobs, grow their own food, or seek other
 ways to feed themselves.
 nindustries that employ workers on an hourly basis, the normal workweek was
 40 hours. Although there was no legal maximum workweek, a time-and-a-half rate
 was paid for each additional hour worked. Many industries pay workers by piece-
 work, which avoids overtime and circumvents the prohibition on child labor.
 The condition of employee housing on the tea and sugar plantations, at the major
 state-owned corporations, and within military and police barracks, was substandard.
 Sanitation and water facilities are often lacking.
 Building codes are often unenforced. Some structures have tripled in height above
 the original foundations, leading local engineers to express reservations about the
 structural integrity of these workplaces. Factories are generally sound, but machin-
 ery almost always lacks safeguards.
 Vestiges of occupational health and safety legislation are contained in the Out-
 dated Factories Act of 1954, the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1964, and the Em-
 ployment Decree of 1975. None of these acts addresses present-day working haz-
 ards. The acts do not protect workers who refuse to perform dangerous work from
 being fired although strong unions in certain dangerous industries do protect such
 workers. The Ministry of Labor's Department of Occupational Health is responsible
 for enforcement of the limited occupational safety regulations, but in practice inspec-
 tions are rare, due primarily to the inspectors' lack of vehicles and funding for in-
 spection trips. Under the law, the maximum award payable in workers' compensa-
 tion to a disabled employee, or to the estate of employees killed on the job, is $38.
 Ministry of Labor officials recognized the inadequacy of this amount and at year's
 end were working on remedial efforts, including new legislation.
