 UGANDA
 Idi Amin was overthrown in mid-1979, but Uganda is still
 struggling with his legacy of economic, social and political
 ruin. The post-Amin period has been marked by continuing
 economic decline, political instability, a breakdown
 in the institutions of law and order and generally ineffec-
 tive government administration. The rate of inflation
 soared to well over 100 percent a year; the government's
 foreign exchange earnings are only barely enough to buy oil,
 leaving no official reserves for importing food, spare
 parts, machinery and other desperately needed items; parts
 of Uganda were severely affected by drought which produced
 famine conditions affecting hundreds of thousands of people;
 law and order broke down in various parts of the country and
 acts of political violence and murder were commonplace;
 poorly trained and undisciplined military forces were often
 accused of creating as much crime as they prevented, par-
 ticularly those sent to the West Nile Region in October 1980
 to repulse a reported invasion by forces said to be loyal to
 Idi Amin and those garrisoned in or near the city of Kampala.
 Approximately 10,000 Tanzanian troops remain stationed in
 Uganda at the Ugandan government's request for the purpose
 of maintaining internal security.
 During eight years of brutal misrule, Amin played on long-
 standing tribal, ethnic and political divisions and essen-
 tially destroyed a modern economy. But Amin's exit produced
 such euphoria in Uganda and abroad that the country's
 underlying political, economic and social problems were only
 dimly perceived, if at all.
 The initial post-Amin government, composed largely of exiles
 who had worked to overthrow him, was an interim administra-
 tion which was to pave the way for elections to select a
 permanent government. The President of this first interim
 government, Yusuf Lule, was relieved of office in an
 intra-governmental dispute some ten weeks after taking
 office. His replacement, Godfrey Binaisa, was subsequently
 ousted some eight months later in a May 1980 military coup
 and placed under house arrest. The Military Commission
 government which was subsequently formed held power until
 elections were held December 10, 1980 for a permanent
 government.
 The election campaign, in which four different parties
 participated, was generally free and fair. A group from the
 British Commonwealth observed the elections themselves and,
 despite charges of fraud by the losing parties, termed them
 to have been a valid electoral exercise.
 At the close of 1980, the new government, headed by Presi-
 dent Milton Obote, was organizing itself and taking stock of
 the many problems facing it. President Obote called for
 national unity and asked the leaders of the opposition
 political parties to join in working for Uganda's recon-
 struction. One of President Obote's first acts was to order
 former President Binaisa's release from house arrest.
 
 
 292
 Apart from the general chaos which has characterized post-
 Amin Uganda, there are other limitations on assessing
 the country's human rights situation. Amin's decrees and
 doubts about the validity of the 1967 constitution and
 of its corollaries adopted by the exiles before Amin's
 overthrow, left Uganda without a cohesive body of law to
 govern the the country's daily life. This poses severe
 problems for those charged with running Uganda's government
 as well as for those who wish to measure human rights
 performance and policies. In addition, there are almost no
 reliable governmental statistics to measure Uganda's eco-
 nomic life in recent years.
 Nevertheless, it is clear that Uganda had serious human
 rights problems in the past year. The interim governments
 have not always used resources in the best interests of the
 public welfare. Corruption was rampant. The purchase of
 weapons and expensive cars often took precedence over
 medicines. The interim governments exercised little control
 over the military and bands of armed soldiers were known to
 engage in killing and theft from the citizenry. Many
 Ugandans accused of crimes under Amin languished in prison
 without trial because of the inefficiency and inattention of
 the court system.
 While Uganda was plagued by brutality, corruption and
 lawlessness, these conditions were an anathema to the
 great majority of the people. The new government has
 publicly stated its intention to work to improve public
 security and the economic situation and to welcome political
 opposition.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Instances of torture were reported from Uganda Army prisons
 at Makindye and Lubiri by those who claim to have survived
 it. Given the uncertain status of Uganda's laws, it not
 certain whether legal restrictions against torture were
 in effect during 1980. We know of no actions to discipline
 or punish people accused of torture.
 b.    Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or-
 Punishment
 Conditions in Uganda's prisons were very bad and starvation
 was not uncommon, although this situation improved in late
 1980 with the assistance of outside relief agencies.
 The bulk of the prisoners were associated with the Amin
 regime; ordinary criminals were in a distinct minority. Poor
 prison conditions were more a product of a failed economy
 and inefficient administration than of conscious government
 policy.
 
 
 293
 c. Disappearances
 Disappearances, generally following arrests by the Army,
 were a problem. This resulted as much from poor adminis-
 tration and inefficiency as it did from any specific
 motivation on the part of the government or Army. There are
 no reliable estimates of how many people might have been
 affected by disappearances.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There were many cases of arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 by the interim governments, and all detentions were not
 publicly announced. Habeas corpus had been a part of
 Ugandan law in the past and honored in many cases by the
 interim governments. While some detainees were released, a
 large number associated with the Amin regime remained in
 detention at the end of the year.
 e. Denia of Fair Public Trial
 On the whole, the Ugandan judicial system suffered much
 from the general breakdown of public administration under
 the interim governments. Criminal suspects with adequate
 means were often able to buy their way out of jail and
 escape trial. At the turn of the year, some prominent
 members of the Amin government, held on criminal charges,
 had not been brought to trial, and thousands of soldiers and
 Amin era functionaries were awaiting trial. Counsel was
 generally available for those charged with crimes and a
 legal society defended indigent persons. The trials that
 were held were generally open.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Military authorities without warrants entered homes at will
 during the interim government period. These actions were
 usually taken to search for illegal weapons and stolen
 property and usually resulted in massive stealing by
 the soldiers involved.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 While there are little reliable data published about Uganda's
 economy, it has almost certainly continued the rapid
 decline that set in during the Amin period. The interim
 governments did not establish coherent policies for economic
 reconstruction, education, health care, employment, housing
 or other basic aspects of domestic policy. The shortage of
 resources, waste and corruption prevented the government
 from having more than an occasional impact on fulfilling
 vital needs. The modern sector of the economy was dominated
 by black market activities and plagued by an inflation rate
 of 100 percent or more. Persons employed in both the public
 and private sectors were usually forced into some illicit
 business to make ends meet. The private sector provided
 most of the country's food with little or no government
 assistance. Relief food for starving Ugandans in the North-
 east was provided and distributed by foreign governments and
 international relief agencies. The interim governments
 provided some coordination and security for those efforts.
 
 
 294
 Lack of funds severely inhibited the delivery of social
 services in 1980. There are some 400 rural health clinics,
 dispensaries and hospitals organized into a referral sys-
 tem. Government resources were inadequate to support this
 system with drugs, medical equipment or personnel. Simi-
 larly, the country has a well established educational system
 which was hampered by lack of funds. For example, an
 innovative program to incorporate rural development train-
 ing into the primary school curriculum, since most rural
 primary students complete only a few years of schooling,
 is seriously constrained by the shortage of resources.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Uganda has a free press in both theory and practice.
 This was particularly evident during the 1980 election
 campaign during which each party had its own publica-
 tions and the government-owned media covered each of the
 parties activities, although they clearly favored one of the
 parties. Freedom of assembly and speech were also clearly
 evident during the 1980 election campaign as the-Various
 parties criticized each other and the government freely.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Roadblocks manned by soldiers and police controlled domestic
 travel, although their stated purpose was to halt crime and
 the infiltration of forces loyal to Idi Amin and other groups
 opposed to the interim governments. At the end of the year, it
 was not clear whether the newly elected government would con-
 tinue this practice. The chronically short supply of foreign
 exchange gave the interim governments some de facto control
 over foreign travel as they could determine who would receive
 foreign exchange needed for foreign travel expenses. It was
 not clear whether Ugandan laws in effect hampered emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Uganda had a very active election campaign in 1980 which
 attracted a wide variety of candidates. The interim
 governments which ruled before the elections were appointive
 and thus provided limited opportunities for participation
 by the qeneral public. Women in theory have equal rights,
 but in the pist hsve, not been active participants in the
 country's highly charged politics. Nevertheless, the
 interim governments had a woman minister and another
 served as a deputy minister. The new government appointed a
 woman to a ministerial level post.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The interim governments regularly permitted International
 Committee of Red Cross officials to visit prisoners not
 under military control but not those held by the military.
 The United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNHRC)
 decided to make a detailed study of the violations committed
 by the former government of Amin, but no such study had been
 initiated, either by the UNHRC or the interim Uganda govern-
 ment, at the end of 1980.
 
 
 295
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.SFISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: UGANDA
 
 1978     1979     1980
 
 ---n---n--nn--------------------------n-------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTALo..           0.0      3.0       6.1
 LOANSo.  .........           0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............           0.0      3.0       6.1
 A.AID .................           0.0      3.0       0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0        0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ........              0.0      3.0       0.0
 (SECSUPP.ASSST.).            0.0      3.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......           0.0      0.0       6o1
 LOANS..............           0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTST.....,...            0.0      0.0       6.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL......              0.0      0.0       0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS..o..           0.0      0.0       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...,            0.0      000.      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.....               0.0      0.0       6.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.           0.0      0.0       1.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....            0.0      0.0       47
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST*..           0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS...........            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............           0.0      0.0       0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI,!..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS     S           0...0 0.  0.0      0.0
 OTHER...........           00      0.0       0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST-TOTAL*..           0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS*...........            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS*...........            0.0      0.0       0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS   N.. S*.          0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS,,o.           0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EOTRNG.,,            0.0      0.0       0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...           0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ..,....           0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL.           0.0      3.0       6.1
 LOANS..........  .,          0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............           0.0      3.0      60.1
 --l ------------------------------------I~ilililll~lll--
 OTHER US LOANS.......o..           1.8      0.0       0.0"
 EX-IM BANK LOANS......           1.8      0.0       0.0"
 ALL OTHER............            0.0      0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 
 TOTAL.****
 lORD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDS
 ADS
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 978     1979     1980    1946-80
 4.9      3.7     92.5   197.1
 0.0      0.0     0.0      8,4
 0.0      0.0     0.0      3.2
 0.0      0.0    T2,5    115.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     9.7     27.2
 3.6      3.7     7.3     34.6
 1.3      0.0     3.0      8.7
 0.0      0.0     0.0      00
 
 lillll
 
 
 296
