 UGANDA
 In the period since it assumed control in January 1986, the
 National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government headed by Yoweri'
 Museveni has established authority in the areas firmly under
 its control, primarily in the southern and western parts of
 Uganda. Remnants of previous regimes continue guerrilla
 activity in the north, as do political and criminal elements
 in the east. The NRM has promised that a new constitution
 will be drafted and presented to Ugandans for approval.
 Progress has been slow, and due to continued fighting in the
 north and east, the NRI4 may find it difficult to keep its
 pledge of a 4-year transitional period. In the interim, the
 1980 Constitution is suspended and political activity not
 allowed, although parties exist nominally. The President
 exercises executive authority with the assistance of a Cabinet
 of his choosing. The National Resistance Council, while
 intended to serve in a legislative capacity, has in fact had
 little active responsibility.
 The security structure of the Government is composed of the
 National Resistance Army (NRA) and the police. The NRA, a
 disciplined organization during its bush days, has absorbed
 soldiers from previous regimes and recruited those who did not
 fight for the NRA's goals before its assumption of power.
 Thus, discipline and morale have dropped, most notably in the
 contested areas, where fighting is keeping up to 50,000 troops
 in the field. NRA soldiers have committed burglaries and
 automobile hijackings at gunpoint, even in the uncontested
 areas of Kampala and West Nile. The Government attributes
 many such abuses to NRA deserters. The police force was
 greatly reduced by the Museveni Government's policy of weeding
 out those accused of abuses under previous regimes. While
 police have been augmented in Kampala and given more authority,
 they still number only around 4,000 (compared to 10,000 under
 previous regimes), and the security situation has not yet been
 brought under control. The army continues to perform many of
 the tasks previously performed by the police. Uganda also
 moved troops along the Kenyan border to improve security and
 to halt guerrillas from making cross-border raids from Kenya.
 Museveni inherited a devastated economy. Initial NRM policies
 fueled inflation! However, the Government in 1987 began to
 implement economic reforms in conjunction with the World Bank
 and the International Monetary Fund. Major undertakings
 included a devaluation of the Uganda shilling by 77 percent,
 price increases to farmers ranging from 130 to 230 percent for
 food crops, increased petroleum prices, and the planned
 privatization of parastatals (public corporations) which are
 draining the budget.
 The NRM has given a high public profile to its concerns about
 human rights abuses in Uganda and Africa, most recently in an
 October address by President Museveni at the U.N. General
 Assembly. Human rights and other organizations, including the
 international press, have noted favorably the contrasting
 approaches between the NRM and previous regimes. Nevertheless,
 in 1987 the goal of national reconciliation was undercut as
 continuing unrest in the northern and eastern regions of Uganda
 contributed to a deterioration of human rights, especially in
 the areas of military operations. There were frequent reports
 of execution of adversaries wounded in battle, of homes and
 fields burned, of occasional torture of prisoners in NRA
 custody, and of continued detention of those thought to be
 unsympathetic to the NRA. As a result of the fighting,
 thousands of persons--some reports indicate as many as 100,000
 
 
 331
 UGANDA
 in 1987--have been displaced, including 2,000 to Kenya. The
 Commission of Inquiry into past human rights abuses, which
 Museveni established in 1986, continued to hear testimony in
 1987-but did.not issue any reports. The Commission plans to
 spend 2 years collecting evidence for the Attorney General,
 who will decide which cases should be prosecuted.
 RESPECT.FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 While it is often difficult to distinguish between victims of
 the w~r. and of political murder, there continued to be clear
 evidence of killing by both the NRA and rebels in Uganda in
 1987. Thq-NRA has faced persistent fighting in the north and
 east from various splinter opposition groups. In the north,
 these rebel groups continue to harass NRA troops and the
 civilian population, attacking small government army units and
 looting both civilian and government properties. Rebels have
 killed local author~ities and members of the Resistance
 Committees. in eastern Uganda for their support of the
 Government and killed villagers or burned their granaries for
 their alleged support of the NRA. NRA troops have treated-,
 villagers-similarly. In a few documented cases, NRA soldiers
 (and civilians) have.executed alleged criminals without giving
 them a chance to defend themselves. (See also Section l.g.,
 below.)
 Amnesty International issued a special report in July 1987 in
 which it noted the positive steps the Government had taken to
 end human rights abuses in .Uganda. It added, however, that it
 had a number of new concerns, based on-many reports, including
 reports of extrajudicial killings by government troops in
 combat areas. Former Minister of Energy Andrew Kayiira was
 murdered on March 6, 2 weeks after his release from prison
 where he had been held on suspicion of preparing a coup. Five
 suspects have been charged with the murder. At the end of
 1987, no trial date had been set, and the motivation for the
 killing remained unclear.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearance, common under previous regimes,
 markedly declined under the NRM Government. However, there
 were allegatio.ns,.especially by church authorities, of
 disappearances in the north and east.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture.and inhuman treatment are not sanctioned by Ugandan
 law, but for many years extreme forms of torture have taken
 place at detention centers, particularly military barracks,
 where political prisoners are often held illegally. The NRM
 Government has allowed the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) to visit prisons in uncontested areas of the
 country and has cooperated in improving conditions in response
 to ICRC suggestions. However, the Government did not allow
 the ICRC access to military prisons throughout the year,
 although at year's end an- agreement was reached between the
 Government and the ICRC to allow such visits. Human rights
 organizations such as Amnesty International have alleged
 
 
 332
 UGANDA
 inhuman treatment and torture by the NRA, which has its own
 detention centers outside the jurisdiction of Ugandan law.
 In its 1987 Report, Amnesty International mentioned two deaths
 in 1986 due to use by soldiers of the three-piece tie. The
 three-piece tie entails tying a person's arms behind his back
 until the elbows meet, a painful procedure that can lead to
 gangrenous infections of the hands and arms as well as rupture
 of the breast-bone and asphyxiation.
 Early in 1987, there were indications that the three-piece tie
 was still being used in military detention centers. In its
 July quarterly report, however, the Uganda Human Rights
 Activists (UHRA), a nongovernmental organization which
 monitors human rights in Uganda, stated that the use of
 torture had "greatly diminished," and that the three-piece tie
 had been discontinued. President Museveni has said the
 three-piece tie is against official government policy. Other
 abuses include scattered reports of rape of women and forced
 concubinage by NRA commanders.
 In the civilian prisons, there are allegations that medicine
 intended for sick prisoners is sold by prison officials.
 Prison conditions are substandard with overcrowding, poor
 sanitary conditions and shortages of food, blankets, and
 medicine. The high prison population has led at times to an
 inadequate supply of food and the rapid spread of diseases
 such as typhoid, dysentery, and malaria. Substandard prison
 conditions were the cause of two riots by inmates in Luzira
 prison in 1987. In mid-November inmates complained that
 visitors had been robbed by prison guards and that visits had
 not been allowed that month. The UHRA reported recently that
 at least 50 persons died in Luzira during a 3-month period in
 1987 due to overcrowding and poor sanitary conditions. There
 were reports of a few children as young as 12 years old being
 held in some prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 A number of persons were subjected to arbitrary detention,
 both legal and extralegal, during 1987. Most political and
 security detentions take place outside the regular legal
 system and, as noted, such detainees usually are held in
 military prisons. An Amnesty International special 1987
 report contained a listing of 50 persons whose cases had been
 reported as being uncharged political detainees. In October
 two former Ministers in the Obote regime were arrested by
 customs officials. By November, following an investigation
 into an alleged plot to overthrow the Government, both had
 been released. Another former Minister, David Lwanga, was
 released on bail in July after spending 9 months in prison on
 charges of treason and terrorism. The charges were reduced to
 unlawful possession of firearms. In November, however, Lwanga
 was rearrested. At the end of 1987, he was still being held
 without additional charges.
 Legal detentions in political and security cases are,
 accomplished under the Detention and Security Act of 1967
 which permits unlimited detention without charge. In 1987 two
 persons were held under this law, human rights activist Lance
 Seera Muwanga, and an unnamed individual detained briefly in
 connection with the so-called economic sabotage of the coffee
 ferry at Jinja. Muwanga, detained in February 1987, was still
 incarcerated awaiting charges at the end of 1987.
 
 
 333
 UGANDA
 Military prisoners are drawn mainly from ethnic groups such as
 the Langi and the Acholi which inhabit the war-torn areas of
 the north and east. Grounds for detention usually are based
 on suspicion of being a guerrilla, fighter or sympathizer, and
 those detained are not allowed to post bail. In June the
 National Resistance Council (NRC) passed an amnesty bill which
 applies to all those who served in armies, police, prisons,
 and state security agencies of former regimes who have not
 committed murder, rape, genocide, or kidnaping with intent to
 murder. President Museveni has announced that at least 6,000
 out of a possible 50,000 rebels had taken advantage of the
 amnesty through the end of 1987.
 There Is no forced labor in Uganda, although prisoners may be
 requirbd to perform certain types of manual labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system consists of Magistrates Courts, the High
 Court, and the Uganda High Court of Appeals. The Ugandan
 judicial system contains procedural safeguards modeled after
 British law, including the granting of bail and appeals to
 higher courts; The legal profession is generally respected
 and is highly educated. No special courts have been
 established for purely political or security cases. Those
 accused, if they are'brought to trial, are generally accorded
 a fair public trial, although the process of the justice
 system is slow and laborious. Detainees are often held
 without bail--though not incommunicado--for long periods of
 time while the Government conducts an investigation. In the
 case of former Commerce Minister Evaristo Nyanzi of the
 Democratic Party, and 18 other prominent figures arrested in
 October 1986, 8 were eventually cleared of treason charges and
 released in Febiuary 1987. Charges were dropped against four
 others, and the actual trial of the remaining seven defendants
 started in September,1987. Despite the delay, the trial was
 open to the public and covered extensively in the press. It
 was continuing at the end of 1987. In another case in
 September 1986, .the NRM arrested a group of 25 alleged
 monarchists who were said to have plotted the return to power
 of the Xing (Kabaka) of Buganda. Although many of this group
 have been released on bail; the Government had not yet brought
 them to triil at the-end of 1987.
 Under the NRM Government, soldiers are expected to obey all
 laws. Military tribunals hear charges against soldiers, and
 any soldier accused of a capital offense must be assigned
 counsel. In other cases, the accused has the right to engage
 defense counsel or defend himself. Punishment is strict, and
 five NRA soldiers have been executed after being convicted by
 military tribunals. Three more-soldiers were on trial for
 murder in late 1987.
 In a move to augment the judicial system, the NRC passed two
 bills in 1987 legitimizing the system of Resistance Committees
 (RC's) and setting out their limited judicial powers. These
 Committees had developed under Museveni and the NRM to handle
 local grievances in an expeditious manner. The RC's are
 allowed to settle civil disputes, such-as questions about land
 ownership or payment of bills at the local level. As yet,
 there is no indication that the RC's conflict with the normal
 judicial procedures in Uganda.
 
 
 334
 UGANDA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the NRM Government, interference with personal privacy
 and family life through harassment of the populace has
 diminished in the noncombat areas. However, the hijacking of
 private vehicles and armed robbery continue in Kampala and
 other urban areas. Roadblocks, designed to intercept rebel
 penetration and smuggling, are common. In the contested areas
 of the north and east, NRA soldiers turned occasionally to
 stealing and looting.
 Because of clashes between the NRA and rebel forces in areas
 in northern and eastern Uganda, thousands of people moved to
 more secure areas. Some reports indicate that as many as
 100,000 displaced persons are involved. Food and resettlement
 needs for those displaced persons have been supplied both by
 the Government and international relief organizations. Some
 2,000 people fled for security to Kenya where they were cared
 for by local authorities and the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR). Some also may have fled to southern Sudan;
 however, conflict there rendered them inaccessible to the
 UNHCR.
 There was no indication that the NRM Government interfered
 with private correspondence in 1987.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict
 Roughly one-half of Uganda is presently under threat of armed
 conflict, raising the potential for human rights abuses.
 Confirmed reports of attacks on civilians by both rebel and
 government troops have been published. Houses have been
 looted and granaries burned. Allegations of chemical warfare
 by NRA troops have not been confirmed and seem unlikely given
 the remoteness of many troop units and the relative lack of
 sophistication of NRA soldiers in the use of such weapons.
 Prisoners of war taken by both government and rebel forces are
 often interrogated for information and held indefinitely.
 Recent reports accuse the NRA of killing wounded guerrillas
 rather than taking them captive. The rebel units comprise
 many Acholis and come from troops that served under the Obote
 and Okeflo Governments, as well as other disparate groups. In
 this latter connection, there have been reports that the NRA
 had killed rather than attempted to capture large numbers of
 poorly armed or unarmed rebels who believe themselves protected
 by magic when they attack NRA positions.
 As a result of the fighting and the movement of displaced
 persons, Uganda-Kenya relations deteriorated in 1987. Uganda
 charged that Ugandan refugees in Kenya were in fact rebels,
 and claimed in October that Kenya-based rebels were killing
 civilians.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is generally respected in Uganda with the
 important exception of the ban on partisan political activity.
 This ban prevents political parties from holding press
 conferences or organizing rallies and other functions at which
 party officials would speak.
 
 
 335
 UGANDA
 Despite the restriction on political activity, extensive public
 debate usually is possible in government and nongovernment
 seminars and in the press. Over 15 newspapers publish a wide
 range of viewpoints c6vering the political spectrum. Relative
 freedom of the press is reflected in coverage of internal
 events, including reporting of human rights violations, the
 ongoing civil war, and alleged corruption by government and
 army officials. Both the President and the Minister of
 Information have publicly stated their support of a free
 press; however., they increasingly have castigated journalists
 for not reporting responsibly and for failing to check facts.
 In 1987 the Minister of Information stressed the need for a
 press law and a press council, composed of members of the
 press, to establish professional standards for journalists.
 Also, the Government has occasionally used a variety of
 techniques to curb press freedom. The NRM banned the
 newspaper The Weekend Digest in June 1986 for printing a story
 unfavorable to the NRM. It arrested editors Wilson Wandera
 and Jesse Mashate on charges of treason and then released them
 on bail. Although the charges of treason remain, there was no
 trial in 1987. When Mashate attempted to resume publication,
 he was denied official permission; subsequently he began
 publishing another newspaper, The Tablet, which, although
 unregistered and therefore technically illegal, has been
 appearing without government interference. Another
 publication that experienced close government scrutiny in 1987
 was The Activist, published by the Uganda Human Rights
 Activists. An NRA-commander seized all copies of the July
 issue and permitted the magazine to appear only-after warning
 the magazine staff to research thoroughly all articles.
 The authorities detained Lance Seera Muwanga in February 1987,
 ostensibly because of his outspoken criticism of the
 Government. In an article in The African Concord, Muwanga
 accused the NR4 of human rights violations in excess of those
 committed under Idi Amin. No charges have been brought
 against Muwanga, and no trial date set.
 Among the 19 persons arrested in October 1986 for alleged
 treasonable activities was Anthony Ssekweyama, editor-in-chief
 of the Democratic Party newspaper, The Citizen. Ssekweyama
 had been detained several times under the-Obote Government.
 He was released in 1987.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits for public gatherings must be obtained from police
 authorities, who have the right to deny the permit in the
 interest of public safety. Although political parties are not
 banned, political activity is not allowed; thus large
 gatherings usually occur either on government-sponsored or
 religious occasions. In rare cases, permits have been denied
 to fundamentalist religious groups for fear of public
 disturbances. Professional associations operate without
 hindrance,* as do international service associations.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), Uganda's
 national labor federation, held its first free elections in 5
 years in early 1986 and in 1987 sought to rehabilitate
 regional union structures. President Museveni has told trade
 unions that they are free to engage in collective bargaining
 with employers. The Minister of Labor has stated that the
 Government recognizes the right of workers to strike, but it
 does not approve of wildcat strikes and prefers that workers
 
 
 336
 UGANDA
 first exhaust more conciliatory methods of resolving labor
 disputes. Labor-government relations have improved under the
 NRM Government, and unions generally have been supportive of
 government measures to fix prices of essential commodities.
 Since the Okello coup in 1985, trade unions have had the right
 to associate-with international labor organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity, Islam,
 and African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not obstructed. There is no
 government control of religious publications, even those with
 an antigovernment slant. Foreign missionaries and other
 religious figures are welcome in Uganda. Religious leaders
 frequently speak out publicly on topics relating to their
 followers' welfare, addressing in particular human rights,
 security, and political issues.
 There were intermittent confrontations in 1987 between
 evangelical Christians and members of a fundamentalist Muslim
 sect, culminating in violence in Masaka. The NRA restored
 order but killed several Muslims in the process. Because of
 increasingly serious and violent disagreements over Muslim
 leadership issues, the NRM Government announced it would
 submit the leadership question to a Ugandan court and insist
 on adherence to the court's decision.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In theory, Ugandans are free to move, reside, and choose their
 place of work anywhere within the country.  In practice,
 however, travel within the country in 1987 became increasingly
 difficult because of sporadic guerrilla attacks and rebel
 activity that cut off the north and east from the rest of the
 country. The NRA has set up extensive roadblocks to try to
 interdict rebel activity, and freedom of movement has been
 affected. There are no restrictions which prevent Ugandans
 from emigrating.
 In the early 1980's, Uganda was the second largest generator
 of refugees in Africa--over 300,000, the majority of whom fled
 to southern Sudan and northeastern Zaire. In recent years,
 most have returned. Only 6,000 Ugandan refugees remained in
 Zaire by the end of 1987. Roughly 130,000 were-also still
 living in southern Sudan by the end of the year, although some
 60,000 returned to Uganda during the year with the help of the
 UNHCR. Approximately 30,000 of the 40,000 Banyarwanda who
 fled Uganda to Rwanda in 1982-83 as a result of quasi-official
 harassment of this minority returned after the 1985 coup,
 mainly resettling in the southwest.
 Because of iebel activity by the Sudanese Peoples' Liberation
 Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in 1987, Sudanese as well as Ugandan
 returnees have crossed the border from Sudan into northern
 Uganda. The UNHCR estimated that there were several thousand
 Sudanese refugees in Uganda by the end of the year. About
 2,000 new refugees from Zaire moved in with ethnic relatives
 along the border after fleeing a local conflict in Zaire.
 There were no reported instances of forced repatriation of
 refugees in 1987.
 
 
 337
 UGANDA.-
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Uganda presently do not have the right to
 change their government by democratic means. In 1985-86,
 Museveni and his National Resistance Army emerged victorious
 in the long civil conflict against the Obote and Okello
 Governments which had strong northern representation.
 Museveni abolished the parliamentary structure and established
 an interim, nonelected NRA Government which is to last 4 years.
 The Government:encompasses members of various political power
 bases in Uganda, including political parties and former
 fighting groups. In theory, legislative authority resides in
 the larger National Resistance Council (NRC), which has a
 broadei cross-section of ethnic, political, and religious
 personalities. In practice, however, the NRC increasingly has
 been bypassed in the political process. The establishment of
 regional and village resistance councils has been largely
 accomplished in areas firmly under NRM control, but is only in
 the planning stages in the contested areas of the north.
 During the projected 4-year interim, a new constitution is to
 be drafted and presented to" Ugandans for approval. In 1987
 the Government announced steps to sound out public opinion on
 the proposed constitution at the local level.
 'Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The NRM Government is proud of what it has tried to achieve in
 the field-of human rights and has welcomed to Uganda
 representatives of Amnesty International, the Lawyers
 Committee for Human Rights, and the U.S. Committee for
 Refugees.  Visitors from these organizations met with
 high-lqvel government officials, including President Museveni,
 as well as human rights activists and members of the
 government- appointed Commission of Inquiry into human rights
 abuses. The government newspaper printed a letter from
 Amnesty International which reiterated concerns about
 detention without trial, killing of unarmed civilians by
 soldiers in the north, and the "three-piece tie" form of
 torture used by NRA'soldiers. The ICRC continued its programs
 of visits to prisons, tracing missing persons, and family
 reunification. In mid-1987, the NRA and local officials asked
 ICRC to stop its emergency assistance programs in some of the
 disturbed areas. At the end of 1987, the ICRC received
 permission to enter military barracks, where most political
 detainees are held, and to resume its full program of
 emergency assistance in disturbed areas.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantu, Nilotic, and
 Nilo-Hamitic--constitute most of the population. Of these
 groups, the Bantu is the largest and includes the Baganda,
 which, with more than 1 million members, is the largest
 tribe. Two ethnic groups commonly are subject to
 discrimination in delivery of the Government's economic and
 social services: the Banyarwanda and Karamojong. The
 Banyarwanda have suffered expulsion from, and displacement
 within, Uganda. The Karamojong, who live in the semiarid
 region of northeast Uganda, are a pastoral people with a
 tradition of cattle ownership. Under many regimes, including
 the present Government, frequent military action has been
 
 
 338
 UGANDA
 directed against them in reprisal for their violent cattle
 raiding. The Karamoja region is experiencing a serious
 drought and faced famine by the end of 1987, exacerbated by an
 influx of people displaced by army and rebel operations in the
 east. The Ministry of Rehabilitation is working closely with
 donor agencies to provide relief services in Karamoja.
 As Uganda is predominately rural, women are subject to
 traditional roles in agriculture with significant variations
 between ethnic groups. Women are not legally discriminated
 against or officially restricted in seeking education or
 employment. However, even in urban areas, their access to
 education has been declining as the educational system
 deteriorates and the economy declines. Families withdraw
 daughters rather than sons from school in times of economic
 hardship. Women played an important part in the NRA's bush
 war, serving as soldiers, intelligence operatives, and support
 personnel. There are three female deputy ministers in the
 Government, as well as a number of ambassadors and four
 members of the National Resistance Council. There are many
 women advocates and judges, including two women justices on
 Uganda's High Court. The NRI4 has created a women's
 secretariat charged with educating and politicizing Ugandan
 women, as well as a National Council of Women which is part of
 the Ministry of Local Government with responsibility for
 coordinating the activities of women's groups throughout
 Uganda.
 One of the most vexing of Uganda's human rights problems is
 the dilemma of the boy soldiers (Kadogos). These adolescents
 (some are as young as 8 years old) were taken into the NRA
 during the period of the bush war. The Kadogos were largely
 drawn from children in the Luwero triangle who were orphaned
 by Obote's army in the early 1980's. As Museveni's men moved
 through the area, many of the children voluntarily joined the
 army, which "adopted" them and gave them a home. Each boy was
 assigned to a more senior soldier who became, in effect, the
 child's guardian. The Kadogos fought in the civil war and
 were highly visible in the January 1986 battle for Kampala.
 The NRM announced the opening of a special school for Kadogos
 in August 1987. The school emphasizes subjects such as
 carpentry, masonry, and agriculture.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The bulk of Uganda's almost 15 million people live in rural
 areas on subsistence farms. In the modern sector, the legal
 Minimum age for employment is 12 years except for light work,
 which the Minister of Labor may exempt. In addition, there
 are legal restrictions on employing persons under 16 years of
 age in mining and in any night work, except in the case of
 apprenticeship. The legal workweek is a maximum of 48 hours.
 The minimum wage is that of the lowest paid person employed by
 the Kampala City Council, currently about $7 per month.
 Medical care is supposed to be provided by employers. There
 are also occupational, safety, and health standards, but in
 practice, because of the serious decline in the economy, there
 is little effort at enforcement of labor laws.
 
 
 .339
