 UGANDA
 The National Resistance Movement (NRM), led by Yoweri
 Museveni, took power in 1986 following a 5-year guerrilla war
 against the Obote and Okello regimes. The NRM declared that
 it would rule as an interim government for 4 years and then
 turn power over to an elected government. In October 1989,
 the National Resistance Council (NRC) extended the interim
 period for an additional 5 years, citing delays caused by a
 3-year old insurgency. President Museveni, backed by the
 military, serves as chief executive, Minister of Defense, and
 Chairman of the NRM and NRC. Thirty-eight. unelected members
 of the NRC exercise a strong influence on the body and
 dominate the Government's policy organ, the National Executive
 Committee (NEC).
 The security apparatus is composed of the National Resistance
 Army (NRA) and the police. The 65,000 strong NRA, a
 disciplined force during its earlier days, absorbed thousands
 of soldiers from previous regimes as part of the Government's
 policy of reconciliation with former opponents. Consequently,
 discipline declined, particularly in the contested areas in
 the north and east where several serious incidents of NRA
 abuse of authority were reported in 1989. NRA soldiers and
 deserters committed hundreds of burglaries, automobile
 hijackings, and other crimes throughout the country. The
 police force now numbers over 13,000 and is expected to rise
 to over 20,000 by the mid-1990's. Meanwhile, the military
 continues to perform many police tasks. The Internal Security
 Organization (ISO) and military intelligence, both entirely
 staffed by the NRA and both involved with combatting internal
 subversion, have been accused of human rights violations.
 Uganda is dependent on coffee for over 95 percent of its
 export earnings and was seriously affected in 1989 by the
 further collapse of coffee prices and the demise of the
 international coffee quotas. In fiscal year (FY) 1988/89,
 Uganda received over $550 million in foreign grants and
 concessional loans--twice what it earned from exports.
 Producer prices for farmers and wages for salaried workers are
 extremely low. Uganda has participated in International
 Monetary Fund structural adjustment programs since 1987. In
 1989 the NR4 leadership reaffirmed its goal of privatizing a
 number of state enterprises and promoting the private sector.
 Although gross national product grew by an estimated 7.2
 percent in FY 1988/89, per capita income and production
 remained well below levels reached in the late 1960's.
 Disrespect for the rights of civilians by all parties to the
 military conflict in the north and east remained pervasive in
 1989. Credible reports of civilian casualties, illegal
 detentions, and torture by the NRA continued. The rebel
 Ugandan Peoples Army continued to assassinate local Resistance
 Council officials while remnants of the Holy Spirit Movement
 (Section l.g.) continued their practices of forced
 recruitment, kidnaping, and summary executions. Other
 abridgements of human rights in Uganda included laborious
 trial procedures, restrictions on freedom of speech, assembly
 and association, and the inability of citizens to change their
 government.   The Government formed a Constitutional
 Commission to prepare a draft constitution by 1992, but later
 extended the NRM's interim period through 1995. President
 Museveni announced a personal commitment to end the problem of
 illegal detention of suspected rebel opponents or sympathizers
 ("lodgers") (see Section l.d.). Although an estimated 1,500
 
 
 403
 LZGANH
 lodgers remain in custody, over 1,000 were released in
 August. Nationwide elections to the National Resistance
 Council and local resistance councils were held in February
 and March using the queuing method'in lieu of the secret
 ballot. The Government also established two commissions of
 inquiry to investigate egregious incidents of NRA atrocities
 against civilians. At year's end no results had been
 announced.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.' Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Most political and other extrajudicial killings occurred as a
 consequence of military conflict between the NRA-and
 opposition elements, and there was clear evidence that all
 parties engaged in such killings (see Section l.g. for
 details). As fighting in the north and east declined in the
 latter part of 1989, the number of killings fell.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearance, common under previous regimes,
 markedly declined under the.NRM Government. Many persons
 thought to be missing turned up as lodgers (see Section
 l.d.). The lack of an institutionalized processof
 identifying prisoners held as lodgers seriously hampered
 efforts to account for missing persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman treatment are not sanctioned by Ugandan
 law, but for many years extreme forms of torture took place at
 detention centers,-particularly military barracks where
 political prisoners were often held illegally. There are
 credible reports that the NRA engaged in inhuman treatment and
 torture in its own detention centers which remained outside
 the effective jurisdiction of Ugandan law. In quarterly
 reports for 1989, the Ugandan Human Rights Activists (UHRA)
 stated that military interrogators routinely administer
 torture in Room 68 of.the central police station. The UHRA
 quarterly report for April through June 1989 offered the names
 of persons who allegedly were tortured to death by military
 interrogators at Makindye barracks, Mbuya barracks, and Basima
 House in Kampala. An Amnesty International (AI) report on
 Uganda also documented instances of torture in military
 barracks, at the Kampala headquarters. of military
 intelligence, and at the offices of the Internal Security
 Organization.
 The "three-piece tie," a form of torture which entails tying a
 person's aims behind the back until the elbows meet, is still
 used by military interrogators, even though President Museveni
 has declared it to be against official government policy.
 This painful procedure can lead to gangrenous infections of
 the hands and arms as well as rupture of the breastbone and
 asphyxiation. A variant on the three-piece tie, called the
 "suitcase" or "briefcase," in which, following a three-piece
 tie, the feet are tied back, is also used. The victim is then
 dragged on the ground or suspended in the air by a rope.
 Human rights activists report that the three-piece and
 
 
 404
 UGANDA
 suitcase ties are employed on prisoners held by the NRA in
 military barracks, by the NRA-staffed ISO and by military
 intelligence. In October 1988, six members of the ISO were
 arrested in connection with the death by torture of a civilian
 in their custody. The six were released in early 1989 for
 lack of evidence. No NRA soldier or security official was
 known to have been charged for torturing prisoners in 1989.
 Unlike the situation in military barracks, physical abuse in
 civilian prisons is relatively rare, but chronic shortages of
 resources and overcrowding have resulted in substandard
 conditions. The Government permitted the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit prisons throughout
 the country and took a number of steps to improve conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The problem of "lodgers"--persons from the insurgent areas who
 are suspected of being rebels or rebel sympathizers and held
 indefinitely without charge or benefit of due process of
 law--continued in 1989. The number of lodgers declined from
 nearly 3,000 in January 1989 to fewer than 1,500 by the end of
 the year, however. In June President Museveni called upon the
 NRA and the local resistance committees in the insurgent areas
 to speed up the screening of lodgers. In August over 1,000
 lodgers were released. The Government has detained among the
 lodgers a number of children between the ages of 13 and 15.
 Many were released in 1988 and 1989 but an estimated 100 were
 still being held at the end of 1989.
 Persons may be detained in political and security cases under
 the Public Order and Security Act of 1967, which permits
 unlimited detention without charge. In 1989 no one was
 charged under this law.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. The
 Government announced a general amnesty in June 1988 which
 remains valid for rebels not guilty of crimes against
 civilians. In 1989 several thousand rebels who surrendered to
 local authorities in accordance with amnesty provisions were
 treated humanely, confined to reeducation camps, and
 screened. Many were subsequently released, although several
 hundred remain in rehabilitative detention.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system consists of magistrates courts, the High
 Court, and the Supreme Court. The Ugandan judicial system
 contains procedural safeguards modeled after British law,
 including the granting of bail and the right to appeal a
 verdict to a higher court. Members of the legal profession
 are highly educated, and are generally committed to giving the
 accused a fair public trial. A systemic shortage of resources
 and manpower ensures that the process is slow and inefficient,
 however. Criminal investigators lack everything from
 transport to forensic aids to pens and paper. Judges are too
 few in number to handle the huge backlog of cases and are
 hampered by a lack of such basic tools as equipment for
 recording court proceedings. In most cases, evidence at
 trials is recorded in long hand by the presiding judge or
 magistrate. The result of the investigative and judicial
 delays is that individuals charged with capital offenses
 typically wait 2 to 3 years or more for a verdict.
 
 
 UGANDA
 In June the NRC passed a controversial bill which would bypass
 the normal judicial processes, in regions declared to be under
 a state of insurgency. The bill is designed to end the
 detention of lodgrs by creating special magistrates courts in
 areas of insurgency which would expedite verdicts on suspected
 rebels or rebel sympathizers. The new courts would consist of
 five persons: a magistrate, two persons appointed by the
 district RC chairman, and two NRA officers. They would be
 empowered to hear capital cases and impose the death penalty.
 If implemented, the new law would considerably erode many
 legal guarantees to a fair trial. Search and seizure of
 evidence by the NRA or police would be permitted in insurgent
 areas without a warrant. Suspects would be held indefinitely,
 without'formal charges, while their cases are being
 investigated. Bail would not apply. Hearsay and
 uncorroborated evidence would be admissible. The burden of
 proof could be shifted to the accused at the discretion of the
 court. AS fighting in the north and east dropped off during
 the latter half of 1989, the new law was not put into effect.
 But it remains on the books should the President officially
 declare a region to be an insurgent area.
 Other than the lodgers, Uganda is currently holding no
 prisoners for purely political offenses. The trial of Charles
 Kagenda-Atwooki, former Secretary for Information of the
 Uganda People's Congress (former president Obote's party) is
 still pending. Atwooki was granted bail in September 1988.
 When arrested in 1987 Atwooki was'charged with engaging in
 acts of terrorism and possessing seditious materials. The
 terrorism charge has'since been dropped. Joel Walehwa,
 arrested and .eld incommunicado by security officials in 1988
 prior to being formally charged with treason, was released in
 September after all charges against him were dropped.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the NR4, interference by authorities with personal
 privacy and family life has greatly diminished. Roadblocks,
 which had been places of terror under previous regimes when
 unruly soldiers could rob and extort at will, are far fewer in
 number and no longer sites of abuse. Criminal elements are
 present in the NRA, but they must act in secret because theft
 is strictly punished under the NRA code of conduct.
 Nonetheless, NRA soldiers are commonly implicated in such
 crimes as the hijacking of private vehicles and armed
 robbery. In the contested areas of.the north and east, NRA
 soldiers turned to stealing, looting, and other abuse of their
 authority. Although ;equired by law, search warrants are
 rarely obtained.
 There was no indication that the Government interfered with
 private correspondence in 1989.
 g. Uve of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 The civil conflict between the Government/NRA and disparate
 rebel groups in the north and east continued throughout 1989
 (although at a reduced level late in the year) and resulted in
 massive violations of humanitarian law by all parties. In the
 north, remnants of General Basilio Okello's army have waged
 guerrilla war in the countryside, and, in the east, the rebel
 Ugandan People's Army (UPA) has conducted terrorist operations.
 
 
 406
 AI cited a report from a Resistance Council (RC) chairman in
 Gulu which described the deaths of 88 civilians at the hands
 of the NRA between December 7 and 25, 1988. According to the
 report, in one incident 45 civilian prisoners were forced into
 a grass hut and then burned to death. Both Al and the UHRA
 concluded that the incidents were not isolated but part of a
 larger pattern of similar abuses which took place in Gulu
 during the period under review. The then Army Commander,
 Major General Elly Tumwine, condemned the incident and
 announced that a commission of inquiry had been formed to
 investigate it. No results had been announced by the end of
 1989. In July NRA Major Kategara ordered cordon and search
 operations in Kumi District. Kategara's Special Brigades
 committed widespread abuses, including the burning of farms
 and the indiscriminate killing of civilians. The rampage
 through Kumi culminated in the death by suffocation of 69
 suspected rebels who had been detained in railway cars in
 Mukura. The then NRA Commander Salim Saleh accepted blame for
 the railway deaths and admitted that the civilians killed in
 the railway cars had been innocent. Fourteen soldiers
 involved were placed under arrest pending the findings of a
 commission of inquiry. -Again, no results had been announced
 by year's end. President Museveni subsequently toured the
 region and offered his condolences to the families of the
 victims.
 Another 50 civilians were killed in Soroti during similar
 cordon and search operations in-July. In the village of
 Tubur, 30 kilometers south of Soroti, 18 people were reported
 killed at the home of-a man named Emesu. Most were cut to
 .death wLth .long blades known as pangas. While residents
 blamed the NRA, the army has been willing to admit only that
 -some civilians may have died in a crossfire.
 The UPA rebels continued their program of terror and
 assassination against members of local government Resistance
 Councils in eastern Uganda which has claimed the lives of
 dozens of RC officials in recent years. Similarly, remnants
 of the Holy Spirit Movement (HSM) rebels continued their
 practices of kidnaping, forced recruitment, and summary
 executions of opponents. A common HSM tactic was to raid
 secondary schools to force boys to serve as rebels or porters
 and girls to serve as.isexual captives. Those who refused to
 cooperate were often-hacked to death. Victims of
 insurgent/bandit forces were most often rural civilian
 inhabitants rather than military forces. At least several
 -hundred persons died in such raids and ambushes. On Ugandan
 Independence Day, October 9, the Rwenzururu rebel group, which
 advocates-independence for the Bakonjo people of the Rwenzori
 mountains, attacked a subcounty headquarters in Kasese killing
 several civilians including a subcounty chief and the chairman
 of the subcounty Resistance Council.
 During 1988 and early 1989, NRA policy in Gulu and Soroti was
 to burn granaries and intentionally di-splace civilians to deny
 support to the rebels. As a result.-there were over 100,000
 displaced persons in northern and .eastern Uganda in January
 1989. As security improved later in the year, the NRA
 reversed itself and encouraged farmers to return to their
 villages.
 The ICRC provided-considerable emergency food aid to the
 displaced, but assistance to 25,000 displaced persons in
 Soroti was cut off early in 1989 after an ICRC relief convoy
 was ambushed by rebels. A Ugandan worker employed by ICRC was
 
 
 407
 killed, and three others were injured in the attack. Rebels
 also attacked the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees' (UNHCR) Sudanese refugee camp at Ajumani in an
 effort to loot food stores. Transportation of relief supplies
 in the north and east was seriously impeded by sporadic
 rebel/bandit ambushes.
 In September President Museveni hosted a 4-day meeting of the
 National Resistance Army Council at State House. As in the
 past, the President stressed that soldiers are expected to
 obey all laws and that violators of the NRA code of conduct
 would be severely punished. Hundreds of NRA soldiers are
 detained in Luzira prison in Kampala and at various military
 barracks for a wide variety of crimes, with armed robbery
 being fhe most common. NRA soldiers guilty of gross
 indiscipline face the death penalty. Three soldiers convicted
 of rape in Atiak were executed by firing squad in February.
 Two soldiers were executed by firing squad in June for armed.
 robbery and murder of civilians committed in Gulu. In
 November three soldiers were executed in Kumi district after
 being found guilty of committing murder and rape in Ngora town
 3 days before. The total number of such executions in 1989 is
 not known but is estimated at 15 to 20.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speeph and Press
 Freedom of speech in Uganda is restricted by the ban on
 partisan political activity and government sensitivity about
 press reports covering the activlties of armed opposition
 groups and allegations of NRA abuses. Political parties may
 not hold press conferences or organize rallies and other
 functions at which party officials would speak. Party-
 originated criticism is more freely expressed in the press.
 The Democratic Party (DP) maintains a party newspaper, The
 Citizen, which is often critical of government policy as is a
 DP-affiliated magazine, The Exposure. Throughout the interim
 Government's rule, DP leaders have tried to sidestep the ban
 on party activity by issuing circulars describing the party's
 positions. Three such circulars were released in 1989 without
 incident.
 Over 15 newspapers publish a wide range of viewpoints covering
 the political- spectrum. This coverage includes reporting of
 human rights violations, the ongoing civil war, and alleged
 corruption by government and ariay officials. The Government
 supports an official paper, The New Vision, which, despite its
 affiliation, has reported accurately and at times aggressively
 on allegations of human rights abuses by the NRA. While
 criticism of government policies is common, journalists know
 that direct, personal criticism of the President is
 forbidden. Journalistic standards tend to the sensational,
 and some papers show little regard for accuracy.
 In 1989 tie authorities did not detain or charge any
 journalist for criticizing the Government. The Government has
 attempted, however, to intimidate critical journalists in
 previous years, e.g., Francis Odida, editor of the Sunday
 Review in 1988 on charges of treason, apparently for writing
 an article sympathetic to the Holy Spirit rebels. In 1989 it
 continued with new attacks against journalists accused of
 false reporting intended to cause harm to the Government. In
 August Tony Awano, reporter for the newspaper Focus, was
 arrested and charged with publishing libelous information
 
 
 408
 against NRA Col. Kyaligonza. Awano was released on bail
 pending trial. The editor of the newspaper Citizen, Joseph
 Kigundu, faces four such libel cases, one of which was
 incurred in 1989, and is also free on bail. In March the NRM
 Political Commissar urged journalists to develop a code of
 conduct to improve journalistic standards. In August the
 Minister of Information called newspaper editors to his office
 to warn them to desist from reporting "alarmist and seditious
 stories."
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits for public gatherings must be obtained from police
 authorities, who have the right to deny the permit in the
 interest of public safety. The ban on the activities of
 political parties has greatly restricted their ability to
 congregate. In October the Government denied permission to
 the Democratic Party to celebrate its 35th anniversary in a
 public meeting.
 Private, trade, labor, religious, professional, and ethnic
 associations are not impeded.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity, Islam,
 and African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not obstructed. There is no
 government control of religious publications, even those with
 an antigovernment bias. Foreign clergy are welcomed in Uganda
 and are not discriminated against by the Government.
 President Museveni met with religious leaders of various
 denominations several times during 1989 and assured them that
 the NRM respects the separation of church and state.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In theory, Ugandans may work or live anywhere in the country
 and move about freely within it. In practice, travel in areas
 of northern and eastern Uganda in 1989 remained difficult due
 to sporadic attacks by rebels and armed bandits. Freedom of
 movement improved in the latter half of the year as security
 was restored to more regions. More than 100,000 formerly
 displaced persons in Gulu and Soroti district have returned to
 their villages (see Section l.g.). There are no restrictions
 which prevent Ugandans from emigrating or from engaging in
 foreign travel. Mismanagement in the immigration department
 resulted in a complete shutdown of passport issuance in
 September and October, however.
 In the early 1980's Uganda was the second largest generator of
 refugees in Africa. Virtually all of the more than 300,000
 Ugandan refugees who fled to Zaire, Rwanda, and Sudan have
 returned. Indeed the trend has reversed. Because of rebel
 activity by the Sudanese People's Liberation Army, over 50,000
 Sudanese refugees fled across the border to refugee camps in
 northern Uganda, the majority in early 1989. There were no
 instances of forced repatriation or resettlement of refugees
 with asylum in Uganda in 1989. When a group of 238 Ugandan
 refugees were forcibly repatriated from Kenya in April 1989,
 the Government detained some 60 of them. About half of the 60
 persons were screened by the Government and released within a
 month. The others participated in a.political
 reeducation/rehabilitation course and were released before the
 
 
 409
 end of the year. In December several dozen ethnic Somalis,
 many of whom claimed to be Kenyan citizens, sought political
 asylum in Uganda. As of the end of the year neither the UNHCR
 nor the Government had decided their cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Ugandans do not have the right to change their government by
 democratic means. The current form of government, known as
 the Resistance Council system, was instituted by the NR4 after
 it took power in 1986. Having originally pledged to restore
 elected government by 1990, the NRM has now said it will give
 up power to an elected government under a new constitution in
 1995. *In the interim, President Yoweri Museveni, who has
 sought no electoral mandate to legitimize his rule, exercises
 control by virtue of his chairmanship of the NRM/NRA and his
 control over the military. He has appointed a large and
 broad-based Cabinet which includes leaders from all major-
 ethnic, religious, and.political groups.
 In 1986 the NRM established the National Resistaice Council as
 its Parliament. Until 1989, it was exclusively made up of
 appointees: 38 historical members (the vanguard of the NRM,
 who are popularly known as the "bushmen") and government
 ministers. In February and March 1989, the NRM held
 nationwide elections to the local resistance councils (except
 in Gulu where no elections were held for security reasons) and
 to the National Resistance Council. While elections at all
 levels were competitive and all citizens were eligible to vote
 or stand for office, voting was by queuing, i.e., citizens
 indicated their preference by lining up behind their
 candidate. The new NRC thus consists of 258 persons: the 190
 elected members; the 38 "bushmen;" 10 appointees from the NRA;
 and 20 additional presidential appointees. Effective power,
 however, continues to be exercised by the President.
 Representatives from many tribal, religious, and political
 factions, including prominent individuals from previous
 governments, were elected to local and regional resistance
 councils as well as to the expanded National Resistance
 Council.
 A 21-member Constitutional Commission became operational in
 1989 and embarked on a series of constitutional seminars which
 will take it to all of Uganda's 702 subcounties by 1991. The
 stated goal is to involve all Ugandans in the constitution-
 writing process. Constitutional issues were prominently
 discussed in the press throughout 1989, with a wide variety of
 views on the future system of government being expressed.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Respect for human rights is one of the cardinal principles on
 which the'NRM came to power and continues to serve as a basis
 of the regime's legitimacy. As a result, the Government is
 sensitive to international public opinion and has shown a
 willingness to discuss human rights problems with
 international human rights organizations. AI representatives
 visited Uganda in January and subsequently issued a report,
 Uganda: The Human Rights Record 1986-1989, which received
 considerable attention in the local press. Government leaders
 felt that the report was overly critical in some areas. In
 May President Museveni met with AI representatives to discuss
 
 
 410
 UG~ANDA
 it. In July the Minister of Justice met with diplomats to
 answer publicly charges made by AI and explain the
 Government's human rights policy. The attention given to the
 problem of lodgers by domestic and foreign human rights groups
 and by diplomatic observers may have influenced the
 Government's pledge to end the lodger problem.
 The ICRC continued to operate in Uganda in 1989. ICRC
 delegates visited prisons, traced missing persons, and
 assisted in family reunification as well as providing relief
 in conflict areas. In late 1988 and early 1989, ICRC was
 permitted to visit military barracks where many political
 detainees are held. ICRC also conducted human rights seminars
 for the NRA.
 The Office of Inspector General of Government (IGG) was
 established by the NRM in 1986 to investigate government
 corruption and human rights abuses in the current
 administration. The IGG focused its efforts more on the
 former than the latter in 1989. Investigations into abuses
 alleged to have been committed by the NRA in the insurgent
 areas are conducted by the NRA itself. The IGG has no role or
 investigative machinery to conduct investigations in this
 crucial area. An independent human rights organization, the
 UHRA, also monitors human rights developments in Uganda.
 While the Government had been hostile to the group in previous
 years and imprisoned its Secretary General in 1987-1988,
 relations improved significantly in 1989. Government
 officials, including several ministers, participated in the
 two human rights seminars that the UHRA sponsored in 1989.
 UHRA publishes a magazine, The Activist, and produces
 quarterly reports on human rights without government
 interference. The Uganda Human Rights Commission, appointed
 in 1986 by Museveni to investigate human rights abuses under
 previous regimes, continued its information-gathering
 activities in 1989.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantu (south), Nilotic
 (north), and Nilo-Hamitic (east)--constitute most of the
 population. Ethnic cleavages, tribalism, and religious
 intolerance underlie much of the cycle of war and political
 strife that has plagued Uganda for decades. The NRM
 Government has publicly repudiated tribalism and has
 introduced policies to prevent discrimination in housing,
 employment, education, and social services based on race, sex,
 religion, language, or social status. It has advocated
 national reconciliation, stating that all citizens are
 Ugandans first and foremost. This goal is symbolized by
 efforts to include at least 1 representative from almost every
 major tribal, regional, and religious group in the NRM's 76-
 member Cabinet.
 Women played an important role in the NRA's bush war, serving
 as soldiers, intelligence operatives, and support personnel.
 The NRM created a Women's Development Secretariat charged with
 educating and politicizing Ugandan women, as well as a
 National Council of Women which is part of the Ministry of
 Local Government with responsibility for coordinating the
 activities of women's groups throughout Uganda. Women's
 overall status shows significant variations between ethnic
 groups. Women are not legally discriminated against or
 officially restricted from seeking education or employment.
 
 
 411
 Even in urban areas, however, their access to education
 declined disproportionately with the deterioration of the
 educational system and economic stagnation. There are
 significant wage differences in favor of men in similar
 positions held by men and women.
 The NRM has committed itself to the protection of women's
 rights. Domestic violence against women is a relatively
 common practice in Uganda, however, and the Government has not
 comprehensively studied the issue. Women seldom report such
 abuse to the authorities. Traditionally, problems such as
 wife beating are adjudicated by tribal or village elders.
 Women in cities can turn to the courts but very few do. The
 Ugandan Association of Women Lawyers is an affiliate of the
 International Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA). It founded
 a legal'clinic in Kampala in 1988 to provide counseling and
 advice to poor women, The Association is working to promote
 respect for the rights of women and has formed a committee to
 study the issue of domestic violence. Female circumcision is
 not practiced by most Ugandan ethnic groups and has been
 actively discouraged by the Government where it does occur.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Under Ugandan law, all workers, with the exception of skilled
 employees in the civil service, have the right to form
 unions. The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU),
 Uganda's independent national labor federation to which all
 unions are by law affiliated, held its first free elections in
 5 years in early 1986 and began rehabilitating regional union
 structures. Membership in NOTU-affiliated unions numbers
 approximately 100,000 out of 240,000 workers employed in
 private and state-owned industries. Relations between the
 Government and NOTU are cordial. Pkesident Museveni met with
 the NOTU leadership in May and expressed his support for the
 labor movement. NOTU's influence on the overall economy
 remains marginal since over 90 percent of the Ugandan work
 force consists of peasant farmers. Even among industrial
 workers, high inflation and lack of transport have made it
 difficult for individual unions to organize, especially
 outside the major commercial centers of Jinja and Kampala.
 The Government recognizes the right~of workers to strike but
 prefers that they first exhaust more conciliatory methods of
 resolvinq labor disputes. Several strikes took place in 1989
 including actions by bank employees, workers at Lugazi sugar
 works, and the.employees of Ugil textiles. All were settled
 peacefully.
 The most notable strike of 1989 was by the faculty and staff
 of Makerere University. As skilled civil service employees
 they may not unionize or strike. When their employee
 association ndnetheless called a strike in May to highlight
 their demand for a "living wage," the Cabinet threatened to
 dismiss them and evict them from university provided housing.
 At the last minute, President Museveni intervened and arranged
 a settlement.
 NOTU is affiliated with the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity.
 
 
 412
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 by law and established in practice. Union officials are not
 harassed, and unions have access to the industrial court.
 Under the Trade Disputes, Arbitration and Settlement Act, the
 industrial court hears and arbitrates trade disputes referred
 to it by either the Minister of Labor or the parties to the
 dispute. Through this mechanism disputes involving unions
 representing textile, postal, and railway workers were
 resolved in 1989. For some years the ILO Committee of Experts
 (COE) has noted that employees of the Bank of Uganda, "who
 cannot be considered to be public servants engaged in the
 administration of the State," do not enjoy the rights
 guaranteed by ILO Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and
 Collective Bargaining which Uganda has ratified. The COE has
 requested that the Government take steps to rectify the
 situation. There are no export processing zones in Uganda.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law. Under the
 NRA code of conduct, soldiers tried by military tribunals can
 be sentenced to forced labor as part of their punishment.
 There have been reports of forced labor at NRA camps where
 captured rebel soldiers are "rehabilitated."
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Most of Uganda's 16 million people live in rural areas on
 subsistence farms. In the modern wage sector the legal
 minimum age for employment is 12 years except for light work
 which the Minister of Labor may exempt. There are legal
 restrictions on employing persons under 16 years of age in
 mining and night work, except in the case of apprenticeship.
 Enforcement of minimum.age restrictions is limited, but few
 children are employed in the wage sector due to the scarcity
 of jobs and the large pool of unemployed adults. Many
 children, however, work as market boys, car washers, and
 street vendors in the towns.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The normal workweek is 48 hours. Time and a half must be paid
 for each additional hour worked. -Wages are unrealistically
 low compared to the cost of living. An entry level, clerk in a
 government ministry could expect to earn about $9 per month at
 the parallel market exchange rate, which is the rate at which
 goods are priced. The nominal minimum wage is $4 per month at
 this rate. A large bunch of matoke bananas (a staple crop)
 costs $2 and a pair of leather shoes costs $60. Anything that
 has to be imported is prohibitively expensive for the average
 wage earner. Thus, workers must either find a second job or
 grow their own food to be able to feed their families and pay
 primary and secondary school fees. Medical care is supposed
 to be provided by employers but is generally lacking.
 Occupational safety and health standards have been legislated,
 but in practice labor laws are seldom enforced.
 
 
 413