 UGANDA
 
 The Government is dominated by the Ugandan People's Congress
 party under the leadership of President A. Milton Obote. While
 active and vocal, the parliamentary opposition Democratic Party
 is weak, and its influence confined almost exclusively to south-
 central Uganda. Political opposition is harassed by some
 elements of the Government and the ruling party.
 Gaining independence in 1962, Uganda has had great difficulty
 instituting constitutional government and the rule of law.
 Government and politics have been dominated by tribal considera-
 tions. The Uganda People's Congress is made up largely of
 northern Acholi and Langi tribes, while the primary opposition
 Democratic Party is dominated by the south-central Baganda
 tribe. The abuse of human rights reached an extreme in the
 period 1971 to 1979 under Idi Amin. Since his overthrow,
 succeeding governments have not found it possible to establish
 effective discipline over the new army and other security
 forces, which have been partly responsible for these abuses.
 Since winning an internationally supervised, yet widely disputed,
 election in 1980, President Obote's efforts to restore law and
 order in a country deeply divided along tribal lines have been
 challenged by an uncoordinated armed insurgency by factions of
 the losing parties and former Idi Amin supporters, many of whom
 have turned to banditry. In 1983, the Government was increas-
 ingly able to limit the areas in which the guerrillas can operate
 and in lessening the incidence of rebel attacks. However, the
 fighting left in its wake up to 150,000 displaced persons in the
 south central region around Kampala, where the Government for the
 first time was able to launch a largely successful search and
 destroy operation. The majority of the people displaced by the
 fighting are from Uganda's largest ethnic group, the Baganda, who
 have traditionally opposed central governments in general, and
 President Obote and the Uganda People's Congress party in
 particular.
 Numerous human rights violations in Uganda occurred during
 1983, including extralegal killing and detention perpetrated by
 both military and civilian agents of the Government and Uganda
 People's Congress party. In the south-central region, guer-
 rillas, bandits, and army elements engaged in widespread killing,
 looting, and rape. While the Government was able to return the
 military to the barracks in most of the country, it was by and
 large unable to instill sufficient discipline in troops in combat
 areas so that human rights in the south-central region were
 respected by the military and the population protected from
 insurgents and marauders.
 Despite political violence and continued violations of human
 rights, in 1983 there was a trend, albeit uneven and slow,
 towards the return to law and order, due process, rehabilita-
 tion of the free-market economy, increased security, and respect
 for human rights in general, particularly outside the south-
 central region. Security in other parts of the country,
 which had been pacified in previous years, seems to have
 improved. Regular police forces, for example, improved their
 reputation in dealing with the public. While many human rights
 violations continued to occur, these did not seem to be the
 result of any systematic policy or intent of the government's
 leadership. Rather, they appeared to be largely the result of
 deep-seated political, ethnic, and other conflicts within the
 society, compounded by a lack of resources, bureaucratic
 (390)
 
 
 391
 inefficiency, general disorganization, and shortcomings in
 public-service ethics.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 While allegations of extralegal killings at military detention
 centers decreased in 1983, there continued to be reliable
 reports of the continuation of this practice in military bar-
 racks, notably Makindye, Mbuya, and Lubiri in Kampala, and Bombo
 north of Kampala. Motives for extralegal killings are varied,
 ranging from political intimidation and revenge to common crimi-
 nality. Some of those detained in military centers died as the
 result of beatings, starvation, and illness due to overcrowded
 and unhygienic conditions. The numbers of such deaths are
 difficult to fix but could be in the hundreds.
 In the spring, the Army launched major search and destroy
 operations around Kampala in the south-central region against
 guerrillas, who have been operating in the region since at
 least 1981. While many civilian casualties were the result of
 armed conflict, particularly military sweeps through villages,
 many others took place among displaced persons as a result of
 starvation and illness related to unhygienic conditions of camps
 under military control.
 Violent deaths in the south-central region also were perpetrated
 by unidentified gangs--antigovernment guerrillas, but also
 former military men, uncontrolled military elements, or non-
 aligned marauders. Hundreds of persons died in such massacres,
 the largest reported in late May in the immediate vicinity of
 Kikyusa, Luwero district, in which perhaps 200 men, women, and
 children were hacked and stabbed to death. In July, 17 soldiers
 and 13 civilians reportedly died in an attack by unidentified
 persons in the capital of Luwero district.
 Political assassinations and murder with possible political
 overtones seemed to have diminished in the countryside during
 1983; they continued, although at a lower level than in past
 years, in Kampala and in the districts surrounding the capital.
 Precise figures are unavailable, but the number of deaths of this
 type could be at least in the scores. Examples of such deaths in
 1983 included the murder in Kampala of the Uganda People's
 Congress party permanent secretary in the Ministry of Internal
 Affairs in late March, the assassination of four senior Kampala-
 area Uganda People's Congress party officials in early August,
 the murder of a Democratic Party member of parliament from
 south-central Uganda at his home in Kampala in early October, and
 the mid-October murder of a senior Uganda People's Congress party
 official assigned to the Prime Minister's office from northwest
 Uganda.
 There was no firm evidence that such killings were the result of
 concerted government or Uganda People's Congress party policy.
 On the contrary, senior government leadership seemed to be
 seeking to improve discipline and leadership in both military and
 police forces. The Government in 1983 continued to send selected
 elements of its security forces for training abroad and to employ
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 26
 
 
 392
 in Uganda foreign trainers and advisers. In an address to senior
 military officers in August, President Obote underscored the
 military's obligation to protect civilian rights. However,
 central control of individuals and factions within both the
 Uganda People's Congress party and the security forces remained
 tenuous; and the Government was not able to exercise effective
 discipline over army elements in the field or party cadres.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearances through abductions in 1983 were common
 in the Baganda tribal region in south-central Uganda. Some
 disappearances seemed to be the result of unsanctioned criminal
 activity by lower-level military or civilian security forces,
 for political purposes as well as extortion. Reports indicated
 that antigovernment guerrillas and outlaws also carried out
 abductions for ransom and political motives. The number of
 disappearances, while difficult to estimate with any precision,
 probably ran into the thousands in 1983. The most well docu-
 mented cases are those of victims taken to military barracks
 in and around Kampala: The Government maintained that no
 civilians were detained for any length of time in military
 barracks, but there were eyewitness reports to the contrary.
 Some sources report, however, that most people detained in this
 manner apparently are ultimately released.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Credible reports of torture continue to surface frequently,
 particularly in cases of disappearances perpetrated by the
 Government and party agents. Physical abuse, or the threat of
 it, was employed as a common method of interrogation in extra-
 legal detentions, and apparently played a part at times in
 normal military and police interrogations. The Government
 denied that torture is sanctioned, but admitted that it has been
 perpetrated by undisciplined security forces. Although the
 Government has stated that persons guilty of torture will be
 punished, there is no evidence that any cases have been brought
 to trial. Torture is not believed to be common in prisons
 controlled by the civilian police. However, isolated inter-
 rogation houses and especially military barracks such as Makindye
 were cited by eyewitnesses as places where torture took place.
 Reports of violence and degrading treatment against displaced
 persons in the south-central region were numerous. While the
 Government used its own resources, as well as foreign advisers
 and trainers from many countries to instill discipline and a
 sense of responsibility toward civilians, many cases of abuse
 continued to be reported. Women and young girls in large numbers
 suffered rape, and there were indications of forced concubinage.
 Men and young boys were forced by some soldiers to harvest crops,
 without compensation, which were then sold by the soldiers for
 their own profit. Widespread looting of homes, schools,
 churches, farms, businesses, etc., took place in large areas of
 south-central Uganda. Much of the looting was perpetrated by
 military forces, which by and large are not indigenous to the
 region, but are recruited from northern tribes resentful of the
 Baganda and other southerners living in the area. On the other
 hand, depending on the professional ability and inclination of
 immediate military commanders, there were also reports of neutral
 as well as positive treatment of displaced persons in military
 controlled areas.
 
 
 393
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arbitrary arrest and detention of persons in Uganda has been a
 subject of major concern of Amnesty International. The Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) delegation, which was
 obliged to cease visits to detention centers in late 1981,
 departed Uganda in early 1982. However, by late 1983, the ICRC
 had been welcomed back by the Government to assist in relief
 programs for displaced persons and to renew its prison visita-
 tion program.
 There are no documented figures for the number of persons held
 for their political beliefs. Regarding the estimated 150,000
 displaced persons under military control in south-central
 Uganda, it is not clear how many were kept in centers of the
 military against their will, but many apparently did not wish
 to return immediately to their homes, given the prevailing
 instability.
 During British rule an orderly, fair, and equitable judicial
 system was created based on English common law. Although the
 system of justice was abused in the 1960's with the intro-
 duction of detention without charge or trial (which is still
 employed by the Government to silence its critics) and utterly
 debased under Amin during the 1970's, a functioning judicial
 system is reemerging.
 In common criminal cases, due process of law is followed.
 However, cases involving political opposition to the Government
 were handled largely through intimidation, legal detention
 without charges or trial, as well as illegal detentions and, in
 some cases, killings. In 1983, members of the parliamentary
 opposition Democratic Party continued to charge the Government
 with use of the law for political intimidation. However, the
 number of such allegations appeared to be on the decline.
 Habeas corpus exists, but political harassment, inefficiency,
 and lack of control have undermined its consistent application.
 In conjunction with independence celebrations in early October,
 President Obote announced that the Government would release
 2,100 persons from detention, including former soldiers from the
 1971-79 Idi Amin era, criminals serving convictions of less than
 three years, and detainees opposed to the Government. Reliable
 reports indicated that some 1,400 were in fact released.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Uganda's courts enjoy a good reputation for independence and
 impartiality, to the degree they are used and respected by the
 Government. The legal profession is a respected one, but there
 have been reliable reports of the illegal detention of attorneys
 suspected of being politically opposed to the Government or
 Uganda People's Congress party. There are no special courts
 which hear political or security cases. Cases which come to
 trial are public, and there are procedural safeguards patterned
 on English law, including the granting of bail and appeals to
 higher courts.
 There were political prisoners in Uganda in 1983. The number,
 however, was not known with any precision. The Government
 maintained that no one was being held on political grounds unless
 there was suspicion or admission of criminal activity--usually
 
 
 394
 connected with armed rebellion or banditry. The opposition
 Democratic Party contended that there were approximately 1,000
 persons being held in October on purely political charges
 unrelated to criminal activity or intent to overthrow the
 Government through violence. The ICRC has returned to renew
 prison visitations in non-military facilities.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In 1983, armed conflict continued in much of the Baganda tribal
 region in south-central Uganda in 1983. However, large-scale
 security sweeps by military, police, and civilian security forces
 in the Kampala area declined sharply. There continued to be
 reports of detention and harassment of persons suspected of being
 opposed to the Government. Many persons in the capital city
 seemed to express greater fear of common criminality, such as
 armed robbery and housebreaking, than of political intimidation.
 Many believed that undisciplined soldiers were often among the
 culprits. In Kampala there continued to be documented cases of
 private property being sequestered by military elements for
 housing.
 In addition to excesses resulting from both military operations
 and armed insurgency in the Baganda tribal region surrounding
 Kampala in south-central Uganda, there remained in the southwest
 region the plight of the Banyarwanda people, many of whose
 families have lived in Uganda for generations and who have
 claims to Uganda citizenship. Local disturbances caused some
 70,000 to flee their homes in late 1982 out of fear that their
 alienage would mark them for elimination and harassment by other
 ethnic groups. Over 35,000 went to Rwanda and others crowded
 into existing refugee camps in southwest Uganda. There is
 evidence that central and local government/Uganda People's
 Congress party officials, particularly party youth-wingers,
 as well as non-Banyarwanda ethnic groups, exacerbated the
 situation through intimidation and harassment. The United States
 Committee for Refugees documented the situation of the Banyar-
 wanda and the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, other inter-
 national organizations, and the Ugandan Government, provided
 relief assistance. Consultations among the Ugandan Government,
 the Rwandan Government, and the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees established procedures for interviewing the victims on
 both sides of the border so as to determine the citizenship of
 those affected. Though all interviews were completed by August,
 the Ugandan Government had not by the end of the year made
 determinations for any of those who crossed into Rwanda. The
 Ugandan Government set aside land and some facilities for
 resettlement of Banyarwanda elsewhere in Uganda. However, its
 assistance has been tardy and insufficient. Apparently viewing
 the Banyarwandans as aliens, the Government has given the
 impression it would prefer those remaining in Uganda to depart.
 Indeed, in December, renewed hostility against Banyarwanda caused
 another estimated 30,000 people to be uprooted. Some apparently
 crossed into Tanzania. There is evidence that the party district
 commissioner ordered the expulsion of Banyarwanda, giving local
 hostility an opportunity to vent itself. In this case, the
 central government moved quickly to discipline local leaders.
 Many Banyarwanda, however, had already lost their possessions,
 homes, and even lives.
 
 
 395
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of the Government by the opposition in parliament and
 the media is tolerated. Kampala's independent local press,
 including the English-language opposition weekly Munnansi,
 reported security incidents, and attacked the Government for
 human rights violations and other shortcomings. Private
 political discussions were frequent and generally uninhibited,
 providing a forum in which to discuss a full range of topics.
 Opposition party meetings probably undergo surveillance, which
 may or may not be officially instigated.
 The Government owns and operates radio and television stations
 and also operates the most widely read English-language daily
 newspaper. On occasion, these media included factual reporting
 of Democratic Party positions. The opposition's access to these
 media, however, was limited. While censorship of the media was
 not an announced government policy, there was self-restraint in
 opposition criticism of the Government, apparently out of fear of
 harassment by agents of both the Government and the Uganda
 People's Congress party.
 At Uganda's Makerere University there is a 60-year tradition of
 academic freedom which was severely tested during the Amin
 regime. Despite very limited resources, academic i-ndependence
 is reasserting itself.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 There is a limited right of assembly and association in Uganda.
 Many non-political performances and gatherings are held--sports
 events, traditional festivals, fund raisers, theater perform-
 ances, and the like. Self-help groups, in particular, abound in
 reconstruction and rehabilitation projects. There are, however,
 constraints on political association and assembly. On the one
 hand, the Uganda People's Congress party holds many events
 throughout Uganda. On the other hand, while the Democratic
 Party meets in caucus, holds press conferences, gives public
 lectures, and is prominently represented at social and quasi-
 political functions, it does not hold large public political
 meetings because of general insecurity and political intimi-
 dation. The Democratic Party announced in October, for example,
 that it would not participate in by-elections for eight parli-
 amentary seats in November--the first held since the 1980
 elections--because, inter alia, "the security situation in the
 declared constituencies and the country at large is not condu-
 cive to holding of a free and fair election.' The Democratic
 Party accused the Uganda People's Congress party, particularly
 its youth wing, of political intimidation.
 Trade unionism remains very limited and subject to government
 party influence. Uganda's industrial capacity suffered
 enormously during the Amin years and what remains of the labor
 movement has not been active in traditional trade union
 activities. The ruling party's efforts to maintain its influence
 in the labor movement has drawn it into union affairs. The
 Government keeps a close watch on contacts by union leaders with
 outside parties and controls the assistance the unions may
 receive from outside sources. Farmers' associations and
 cooperatives proliferate. Although the Government apparently
 
 
 396
 neither prohibits nor discourages strikes, there were no
 organized strikes or other labor protests during 1983, probably
 as much because of the fragile economy as of the weakness of
 organized labor.
 Professional associations of doctors, attorneys, engineers, and
 accountants operate without hindrance, as do associations such
 as the Rotary International.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Islamic, Christian, and
 traditional religions are widely practiced. Conversion between
 religions is not obstructed. Religious leaders frequently speak
 out publicly on their followers' welfare. Religious leaders in
 1983 publicly discussed disappearances, detentions, insecurity,
 etc., especially with respect to the welfare of the population in
 the south-central region. Traditionally, certain ethnic groups
 have had one predominant religion; ethnic divisions and religion
 have spilled over into both local and national politics as the
 various groups vied for power.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement, residence, and choice of workplace
 throughout Uganda, with the major exception of restrictions in the
 south-central region. Roadblocks manned by police and military
 have become fewer throughout the country in 1983--indeed, they
 disappeared from most areas. Roadblocks continued in Kampala,
 particularly, following intermittent criminal activity or
 security alerts.
 Lack of foreign exchange continued to inhibit international
 travel in 1983, but persons were not otherwise hindered by the
 Government in travel abroad.
 The Government said it would welcome back most exiles, but
 figures were not available on how many took advantage of the
 offer. While opposition groups claimed many followers in exile,
 forced exile does not appear to be a government policy. In 1983
 over 200,000 persons in voluntary exile remained in eastern Zaire
 and southern Sudan in the aftermath of the overthrow of the Amin
 Government in 1979. Most seem to have left Uganda because of the
 breakdown in law and order, fear of persecution for having served
 the Amin Government, opposition to the present Government and
 Uganda People's Congress party, and/or difficult economic condi-
 tions. While there was some voluntary repatriation from Zaire,
 almost no one returned from southern Sudan. There were also
 exiles, including former political groups, in Kenya, Europe, and
 the United States. In October, President Obote invited two former
 heads of government, Yusufu Lule and Godfrey Binaisa, who had
 served during the 1979-80 period, as well as others living in
 voluntary exile abroad, to return home. Despite assurances for
 their safety, there were initially only negative responses.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 President Obote and the Uganda People's Congress party have
 ruled Uganda for 11 of the nation's 21 years of independence.
 Although there was discussion in the Government of moving toward
 
 
 397
 a one-party state, it has not been a part of the Government's or
 party's announced policy since the party's return to power in
 1980. A Commonwealth observer team reported flaws in the 1980
 elections, but concluded overall that they reflected a valid
 electoral exercise. However, in 1983 there was little question
 that the Democratic Party had only limited voice in both Par-
 liament, as well as in Democratic Party constituencies. The
 central government, controlled by the party, appoints local
 officials. The Democratic Party boycotted the November 1983
 by-elections. A much smaller party, the Conservative Party,
 contested the elections in some districts. Failing to win a
 seat, this party claimed electoral irregularities.
 While there are members from all ethnic groups in the Government
 party, its central structure is drawn from the northern tribes,
 primarily Langi and Acholi. The same holds true for the
 Democratic Party whose leadership and suport come primarily from
 the Baganda tribe in south-central Uganda. The military is
 predominantly recruited from the northern tribes, with Acholi
 constituting 60 percent of troops in the ranks. The officer
 corps is drawn primarily from Langi tribesmen openly aligned with
 the Uganda People's Congress party. Top military leaders are
 appointed members of parliament.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is sensitive to allegations of human rights
 violations in Uganda appearing in foreign government statements
 as well as Western press reports. President Obote and other
 senior government officials have repeatedly called for the
 international press to visit and report on Uganda. In the first
 six months of 1983, 15 American journalists had been accredited
 to Uganda, according to the Government, which reported that more
 than 10 of them had visited the country. Many other foreign
 journalists--particularly from Europe and, in addition, at
 least three other Americans--travelled to Uganda in 1983.
 Both non-government organizations--including religious groups
 --and United Nations agencies work with the Government in
 programs throughout the country. A relief administration was
 organized in September 1983 within the office of the Prime
 Minister to coordinate both short-term and longer-term resettle-
 ment for persons displaced in the south-central region. At least
 15 non-governmental and international agencies became involved in
 weekly consultative meetings with the relief administration.
 The ICRC was welcomed back by the Government to Uganda in 1983,
 after having been expelled in 1981. Amnesty International in
 July 1983 published correspondence with the Government from 1982,
 adding that further exchanges had taken place which were not
 published. The national Uganda Red Cross was very much in
 evidence in 1983 in providing relief assistance and seemed to
 enjoy with the League of Red Cross Societies the same government
 support given other international non-governmental organizations.
 The central government was slow in assessing and reacting to
 two ma'or human rights emergencies in 1983. One was resolving
 the late 1982 uprooting of 70,000 ethnic Rwandans in southwest
 Uganda. The second was the situation involving displaced
 persons in south-central Uganda which had been three years in
 
 
 398
 the making and was known to the Government long before effec-
 tive relief action was begun. In the case of the second wave of
 violence against the Banyarwanda, as noted above, the Government
 did react more rapidly to disassociate itself from the troubles
 and arrest some of the perpetrators.
 During 1983, Amnesty International was concerned about the
 detention without trial of large numbers of actual or suspected
 political opponents of the Government, and extrajudicial execu-
 tions of civilians by army personnel. Freedom House describes
 Uganda as "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Uganda has a population approaching 14 million, according to
 estimates of the World Bank, with an annual growth rate of 2.6
 percent. Life expectancy at birth is nearly 48 years. As of
 1980, 35 percent of the population had access to safe drinking
 water. The widely admired health infrastructure built up by the
 1960's was devastated during the 1970's. Its recovery has been
 a top priority of the Government and resources devoted to health
 services have been substantial, focusing particularly on primary
 health care for children and women of child-bearing age. Wide-
 spread immunization is a high government priority in a program
 joined by the U.N. Children's Fund. The latter is also involved
 with the Government in expanding and reconditioning pure drinking
 water supplies throughout the country. Wide-ranging family
 planning programs, fully backed by government policy, are also
 being implemented.
 While not legally or officially restricted, women in both
 national parties by tradition and culture have been slow to
 assert themselves. Although women are active at the grass-roots
 levels, in 1983 there was but one woman of cabinet rank, a Deputy
 Minister of Health, who also was the only woman member of parlia-
 ment; another high-ranking woman was Deputy Secretary-General of
 the Uganda People's Congress party. While their number is few,
 particularly at senior levels, women are found throughout the
 civil service and the professions.
 Uganda has made rapid progress since 1980 in improving its
 economy. The Government is pursuing policies which have
 increased production by providing greater incentives to the
 farmer, particularly the small-plot holder, who is the backbone
 of the economy.
 While constrained by state-owned economic organizations and
 government monopoly on purchases of key agricultural products for
 exports, Uganda's economy is based on free-market principles.
 Individuals are free to pursue private interests and hold
 property. According to the World Bank, over 83 percent of the
 working population is engaged in the agricultural sector, which,
 for the most part, is made up of highly productive small plots.
 Coffee exports account for approximately 95 percent of Uganda's
 foreign exchange earnings.
 Despite its great potential, particularly in the agricultural
 sector, Uganda remains a very poor country. However, its
 economic discipline in response to guidelines established to
 qualify it for foreign assistance has been positively cited by
 the World Bank as well as other international and bilateral
 donors. Foreign economic assistance is playing an important
 role in rehabilitating and expanding Uganda's economy.
 
 
 399
 The Government has made rehabilitation of the educational
 infrastructure, which was internationally known in the 1960's and
 suffered greatly during the Amin period, a top priority. Due to
 a shortage of funds and other national priorities, many self-help
 groups formed by local parents, teachers, religious, and other
 civic groups provide much of the material and labor to rehabili-
 tate local schools. The adult literacy rate and the primary
 school enrollment in the late 1970's was around 50 percent.
 With close monitoring by the International Monetary Fund, the
 Government made further economic reforms in 1982 and 1983. A
 special board was set up to review claims submitted by Asians for
 property confiscated during the Amin regime. Many administrative
 constraints on private traders and crop processors have been
 removed. Competition between cooperatives and the private sector
 is being encouraged. The official availability of foreign
 exchange to the private sector through a weekly auction (by which
 the Central Bank makes foreign exchange available to the private
 sector at a rate of exchange governed by marked forces) has
 improved its competitive position with respect to the coop-
 eratives and government enterprises. Both international finan-
 cial institutions and bilateral assistance donors continued to
 support the government's economic recovery program. Despite this
 progress, overall levels of economic activity remained below
 early 1970 peak levels. Per capita GNP in 1982, although
 increasing nearly eight percent, was estimated by the World Bank
 at only $240.
 
 
 400
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UGANDA
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         9.0       7.4      7.8
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    9.0      7.4       7.8
 A.AID  ...  .............. ......  2.0    7.0      7.6
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    2.0       7.0      7.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        7.0       0.4      0.2
 LOANS. ................     0.0.     0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ................    7.0      0.4       0.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL.   .....          0,0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........       7.0       0.4      0.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         2.3       0.0      0.2
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        4.7       0.4      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............      0.0     0.0       0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0       0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............  ... 0.0      O;0       0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.1       0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG  ....       .      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         9.0       7.5      7.9
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............        9.0       7.5,     7.9
 --------..-.---------------..---------------..---..-...---
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 --.---.-----------.-.-.-..---------.-------------.-.-..-.
 TOTAL ........    38.7     113.2    138.9    487.8
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0      8.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0       9.7     12.9
 IDA               17.0     109.0    124.0    365.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0     27.2
 UNDP               14.0     4.2       0.0     52.7
 OTHER-UN           7.7      0.0       5.2     21.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
