Uganda
In 2006 Uganda missed a key opportunity to reverse its deteriorating human
rights record when its first multiparty presidential and parliamentary elections in
26 years were marred by intimidation of the opposition and widespread voting
irregularities. Torture by security forces of detained suspected rebels and dissidents
continued. One such detainee, Abdu Semugenyi, was reported electrocuted
to death on May 4, 2006 in a “safe house” maintained by the Joint Anti-Terrorist
Task Force. Hopes were raised, however, for an end to the 20-year conflict in
northern Uganda between the rebel Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and the
Ugandan government. A cessation of hostilities agreement is in effect while peace
talks mediated by the regional government of southern Sudan continue.
The War in Northern Uganda
Prior to the start of peace talks in mid-July, LRA attacks on civilians in northern
Uganda, a hallmark of the conflict, continued, although at lower levels than
reported in prior years. Widespread insecurity also resulted from alleged LRA
activity across the Sudanese border in Equatoria. In March LRA rebels were
allegedly responsible for raids on UN Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) installations
and non-governmental organizations in Yambio, Sudan, while LRA rebels in
Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) were suspected
of killing eight Guatemalan peacekeepers on January 23 in an attack on the UN
Mission in DRC (MONUC).
Peace talks in Juba initiated in 2006 by the regional government of southern
Sudan, and mediated by southern Sudan’s Vice-President, Dr. Riek Machar,
appear to represent a realistic opportunity for an end to the conflict. Under the
terms of a cessation of hostilities agreement reached by the parties on August 26,
and amended on November 1, 2006, following violations of the agreement by
both sides, LRA rebels are to assemble at two sites in southern Sudan. Other governments
have pledged financial assistance for the talks through a UN-established
fund.
Issues of accountability for serious human rights abuses committed during the
conflict remain the subject of debate after the LRA called for the International Criminal Court (ICC) arrest warrants against LRA leaders charged with crimes
against humanity and war crimes to be dropped. The government of Uganda,
reversing course after having invited the ICC to investigate the LRA, proposed to
seek the withdrawal of the arrest warrants and the substitution of traditional justice
mechanisms in the event of a successful peace agreement. Government of
Uganda representatives have, in fact, no authority to unilaterally rescind the
arrest warrants and have thus far not sought their withdrawal through an admissibility
challenge.
Some traditional, religious, and civil society leaders in northern Uganda and
some in the international humanitarian community have urged the prioritization
of peace over prosecutions. Others, like the Victims’ Rights Working Group, the
affiliated organizations of which include nongovernmental organizations from
Uganda, have supported the view that prosecutions must not be sacrificed and
that there must be cooperation with the ICC to arrest persons against whom warrants
have been issued.
Human Rights Watch has taken the view that any outcome must include both
peace and justice and that justice must involve fair and credible prosecutions of
perpetrators of the most serious crimes, including prosecution before the ICC of
the four surviving LRA leaders against whom arrest warrants have been issued.
Fair and credible prosecutions for the most serious crimes are crucial to promote
not only accountability, but also a durable peace. Broader accountability efforts
for lesser offenses could be promoted through national and local initiatives that
might include trials, a truth telling exercise, and, where appropriate, use of traditional
mechanisms.
The prospect of peace also raised expectations of a return home for the 1.7 million
persons confined to displaced persons camps. Camp residents continue to
endure hunger and overcrowding, and remain vulnerable to abuses by the undisciplined
Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF), local militias, and LRA rebels.
Improved security conditions in 2006, however, have made possible the movement
of some displaced persons to smaller “settlement sites,” which have better
access to farmland but often lack health and education services.
Disarmament in Karamoja
Allegations of human rights abuses including torture and rape by UPDF soldiers
surfaced in connection with “cordon and search” disarmament campaigns conducted
in the Karamoja region. A leaked report of the government’s commission
of inquiry was quoted in the national press as acknowledging that some abuses
had taken place. After clashes between the UPDF and a Karamojong community
led to the deaths of at least 22 soldiers and an unknown number of civilians in
Kotido district in October and November, the UN expressed grave concern about
the escalation in violence and reports of abuses committed on all sides.
Political Freedoms
On February 23, 2006, President Museveni—in power since 1986—won re-election
and his ruling National Resistance Movement Organisation (NRM-O) a majority of
seats in Uganda’s first multiparty presidential and parliamentary elections in 26
years.
Prosecutions were brought or threatened against opposition leaders, including
front-runner presidential challenger Dr. Kizza Besigye of the Forum for Democratic
Change (FDC), in a clear attempt to undermine his presidential campaign. The
Electoral Offences Squad, formed by the Uganda Police Force, had received
reports of election-related intimidation and assault in at least 22 districts by the
end of January 2006. While some allegations were made against opposition supporters,
the majority were pressed against the ruling NRM-O and state officials.
The NRM-O’s inheritance of personnel and facilities from the “Movement” national
political system secured privileged access to state resources. There were also
reports of illegal military involvement in the election campaigns on behalf of
NRM-O candidates.
Election-day violence was minimal, but both local and EU observers noted major
irregularities across the country, including election officers turning away hundreds
of thousands registered voters who allegedly did not appear on the voter
register. Voting results reported by the Ugandan Electoral Commission reveal a
divided country, with voters in the north and most of the east choosing opposition
candidates, while Museveni’s support came from the south and west.
Freedom of Expression
Local journalists faced intimidation and prosecution in the months preceding the
elections. In November 2005, the Ministry of Information issued a directive to
media outlets forbidding them from running stories on the trial of presidential
challenger Besigye. Acts of intimidation against radio stations, including arrests
of station personnel, were reported. After accusations from the opposition FDC
that the president and top military officials were persecuting Besigye on ethnic
grounds appeared in the privately owned Weekly Observer, its editor, James
Tumusiime, and reporter, Semujju Ibrahim Nganda, were charged on December
13, 2005, with “promoting sectarianism.” Petitions challenging the “promoting
sectarianism” provision of Uganda’s penal code are pending before the
Constitutional Court.
Torture by Security Forces
Ugandan security and military forces continue to use “safe houses,” unauthorized
secret detention centers, and, increasingly, civilian police facilities to detain and
torture suspected rebels and dissidents. In April 2006, Abdu Semugenyi, after
being accused of being associated with the rebel group Allied Democratic Forces,
was detained in a “safe house” maintained by the Joint Anti-Terrorist Task Force in
an upscale neighborhood of Kampala. Other individuals detained in the “safe
house,” some of whom were also tortured, witnessed Semugenyi’s torture and
one reported that Semugenyi was electrocuted to death on May 4, 2006.
Although the authorities first denied holding Semugenyi, they later claimed in
press reports that he was killed while trying to escape. His body has not been
recovered by his family.
HIV/AIDS Treatment and Prevention
Although HIV prevalence has greatly decreased since the early 1990s, the number
of new HIV infections has recently increased from 70,000 in 2003 to about
130,000 in 2005. A shift toward U.S.-funded “abstinence-only” HIV prevention
programs has continued in 2006, undermining the country’s fight against
HIV/AIDS by questioning the effectiveness of condoms and removing comprehensive
HIV/AIDS information from school curricula.
Corruption is an on-going concern. The temporary suspension of more than
US$200 million in grants by the Global Fund in 2005, and a subsequent inquiry
into fiscal mismanagement led to the dismissal of three health ministers but no
criminal charges have been filed. In September 2006, anti-retroviral medicine
worth between $400,000 and $500,000 was destroyed because it had expired at
the national medical stores in Entebbe.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Publication of identifying information of 45 alleged homosexuals in the tabloid
paper “Red Pepper” in August 2006 raised concerns of an escalation in the government’s
long-standing campaign of harassment of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender Ugandans. Homophobic allegations by the same tabloid in 2002 that
two women had married led to their arrest and detention.
Key International Actors
In January 2006 the UK government’s development ministry announced the withdrawal
of US$26 million of direct funding to the government because of concerns
over a lack of democratic and economic reforms. The United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Ireland also previously reduced aid in 2005.
The EU Election Observation Mission to Uganda, which deployed 200 monitors
during the February 2006 elections, concluded that “the elections fell short of full
compliance with international principles for genuine democratic elections, in particular
because a level playing field was not in place.”
The situation in northern Uganda received mention in resolutions of the UN
Security Council for the first time. By resolutions in January and March 2006 the
Security Council requested that the UN Secretary-General make recommendations
as to how UN agencies and missions could better address the LRA problem. The
Secretary-General’s recommendations, issued in June 2006, included continued
collaboration between donor governments and the government of Uganda to
finalize the national peace, recovery, and development plan for northern Uganda;
support for the appointment of a special envoy; and cooperation between the
security forces of the governments of the region with limited assistance from
UNMIS and MONUC.
Representatives of the UN, Ugandan and core donor group governments also met
in March 2006 to discuss the conflict and humanitarian situation in northern
Uganda. One output was the establishment of a Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC)
composed of Ugandan government ministries, donor governments, international
institutions, and representatives of national and international civil society to oversee
an emergency humanitarian plan for northern Uganda.