 UGANDA
 The National Resistance Movement (NRM), led by President
 Yoweri Museveni, took power in 1986 following a 5-year
 guerrilla war against the Obote and Okello regimes. Backed by
 the National Resistance Army (NRA), Lieutenant General
 Museveni serves as.Chief Executive, Minister of Defense, and
 Chairman of theNational Resistance Council (NRC).
 Thirty-eight unelected "historical" members of the NRC
 exercise a strong influence on the body and dominate the
 Government's policy organ, the National Executive Council.
 President Museveni exercises control by virtue of his
 chairmanship of the NRM and has sought no electoral mandate.
 In 1986 the NRM declared that it would rule as an interim
 government for 4 years and then turn power over to a
 government to be elected Under-a system to be defined in a new
 constitution. In March 1989, the NRM expanded the size of the
 NRC through competitive elections on a nonparty, electoral
 college basis, but retained about one-fourth of the seats for
 presidential appointees and "historical" members. In October
 1989, the expanded National Resistance Council extended the
 NRM's interim period for an additional 5 years, citing delays
 in drafting the constitution caused by the 3-year-old
 insurgency. Political party activity has been banned pending
 the adoption of a new constitution;
 The security apparatus is composed of the National Resistance
 Army, the police, and the intelligence services. Discipline
 within the NRA has declined in recent years, particularly in
 the contested areas of the north and east where it has been
 responsible for serious abuses of human rights.
 espite recent efforts to diversify its export base, Uganda
 remains dependent on coffee for over 90 percent of export
 -earnings. Over the past 5 years, the NRM Government has moved
 away from centralized economic policies and since 1987
 participated in International Monetary Fund (IMF) structural
 adjustment programs. The gross national product grew by an
 estimated 6,3 percent in fiscal year 19897-90, the fourth
 consecutive year of positive growth. Nonetheless, Uganda
 suffers from a massive balance of payments deficit and depends
 heavily on foreign aid.
 Human rights abuses by all parties to the military conflict in
 the north and east remained pervasive in 1990. The
 displacement by the NRA of 120,000 residents of Kumi district
 resulted in hundreds of civilian deaths due to exposure and
 disease. Credible reports link NRA units to the killing of
 some 60 civilians in Soroti district in August and September.
 Remnants of the rebel Holy Spirit Movement (HSM) continued
 their practices of forced recruitment, kidnaping, rape, and
 summary executions of civilians.' In March 43 civilians were
 hacked to death by the HSM in Kitgum. Remnants of the rebel
 Uganda Peoples Army (UPA) in the east continued to assassinate
 local Resistance Council officials and fire indiscriminately
 at-civi-lian vehicles. Over 2,100 suspected rebel sympathizers
 ("lodgers") were released in May, leaving fewer than 300 in
 custody by the end of the year. Commissions of inquiry set up
 in 1989 to investigate alleged NRA atrocities against
 civilians in Gulu and Kumi have yet to release any findings.
 Other areas of concern include arbitrary arrest and detention,
 limits on fair trial, freedom of expression and assembly, the
 inability of citizens to change their government, and
 discrimination against women based on customary laws and
 traditional social practices.
 
 
 4N4
 UGANDA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Most political and other extrajudicial killings occurred as a
 consequence of military conflict between the NRA and
 opposition elements, and there was clear evidence that all
 parties engaged in such killings (see Section l.g. for
 details).
 At least two students were killed and three injured when riot
 police opened fire on student demonstrators at Makerere
 University on December 10. The students had been
 demonstrating to obtain satisfaction of non-political
 grievances concerning such issues as living allowances and
 books. The Government immediately issued a statement
 indicating that the shootings had been unauthorized and that
 the police units responsible would be disciplined The
 Government suspended the police officers involved in the
 incident and appointed a commission of inquiry to investigate
 the shootings. The inquiry was continuing at year's end.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no credible reports of disappearances in 1990.
 Many persons thought to be missing turned up as lodgers (see
 Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Ugandan Human Rights Activists (UHRA), an independent
 human rights monitoring group, which in 1989 accused military
 interrogators of torturing suspects, made no such accusations
 in its quarterly reports for'the first half of 1990. However,
 credible sources report that torture continued to be practiced
 against certain prisoners held at military barracks and at the
 headquarters of military intelligence at Basima House in
 Kampala during 1990. According to reliable reports, torture,
 which typically involves beatings, takes place at the time of
 interrogation and may have involved dozens of prisoners in
 1990.
 In response to reports of inhuman conditions for both
 civilians and military personnel detained in military
 barracks, the Minister of Justice and the Inspector General of
 Government (IGG) conducted an inspection of military barracks
 in August. Conditions in the barracks are harsh, but the
 officials found no evidence of torture. Physical abuse in
 civilian prisons is rare, but chronic shortages of food and
 medical resources and overcrowding have resulted in
 substandard conditions. The Government permitted the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit
 civilian prisons throughout the country in 1990. Overcrowding
 in Luzira prison in Kampala eased considerably with the
 release of "lodgers" during the year (see Section l.d).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The problem of lodgers--persons from insurgent areas who are
 suspected of being rebels or rebel sympathizers and held
 indefinitely without charge--was greatly reduced in 1990. In
 
 
 UGANDA
 May the Government released 2,100 lodgers, leaving some 300 in
 custody by the end of the year. The Government stated it
 planned to charge those remaining and initiate trial
 proceedings. In the past, the Government detained among the
 lodgers a number of children between the ages of 13 and 15.
 Following the release of large numbers of lodgers in 1990, it
 was unclear whether any children were still in custody at
 year's end.
 .Persons may be detained in political and security cases under
 the Public. Order and Security Act of 1967, which permits
 unlimited detention without charge. In 1990, no one was
 detained under this law. However, many prisoners were
 detained in military barracks during the year without being
 formally charged under Ugandan law. In April Moses Ali, then
 Minister of Youth, Culture, and Sports and former leader of an
 anti-Obote rebel force, was arrested and held incommunicado in
 military barracks for several weeks before being charged. Ali
 was eventually brought to court, charged with "indulging in
 treasonable acts" and illegal possession of firearms and
 transferred to a civilian prison: Although he was acquitted
 of treason charges in December, at year's end he remained in
 detention and still faced the illegal weapons charge. Three
 officials of the Uganda People's Congress (UPC) were detained
 in August without being charged. Two were subsequently
 charged with treason in September; the other was released.
 Under Ugandan law, a suspect is supposed to be brought before
 a judge or magistrate within 24 hours of his arrest to be
 formally charged. Ugandan authorities often cite delays in
 securing transportation- and a shortage of judges in outlying
 areas as reasons why this requirement is often not met.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. The
 Government announced a general amnesty in June 1988 which
 remains valid for rebels not guilty of crimes against
 civilians. Rebels who surrender to local authorities in
 accordance with amnesty provisions are treated humanely.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The court system consists of magistrates courts, the High
 Court, and the Supreme Court. The Ugandan judicial system
 contains procedural safeguards modeled after British law,
 including the granting of bail and the right to appeal a
 verdict to a higher court. Members of the legal profession
 are highly educated and are generally committed to giving the
 accused a fair public trial. A systemic shortage of resources
 and manpower ensures that the process is slow and inefficient,
 however.
 The result of the investigative and judicial delays is that
 persons charged with capital offenses typically wait 2 or 3
 years or more for a verdict. Remand prisoners, i.e.,
 prisoners held in custody awaiting trial, make up more than
 half of the country's prison population of approximately
 12,000. As of August, 550 prisoners charged with capital
 offenses had been on remand for more than 3 years. In an
 effort to solve the remand problem, the NRC passed a law
 during the year which sets limits on the remand period: 480
 days for capital offenses and 240 days for petty offenses.
 Under the new law, judges are authorized to release suspects
 who have not been brought to trial before these deadlines.
 
 
 436
 UGANDA
 The judiciary is not independent of the executive in some
 political and security cases. The President has the power to
 dismiss High Court and Supreme Court judges. In doing so, he
 is guided by the recommendations of a judicial service
 commission, which includes the Chief Justice of the Supreme
 Court, the Attorney General, and two prominent lawyers
 appointed by the President.
 Disrespect for the judiciary was evident in the-case of Major
 Fred Mpiso who was acquitted of treason charges and ordered
 released by the High Court in 1988. Mpiso was rearrested upon
 leaving the Court and held unlawfully in military barracks.
 The eventual intercession of the Attorney General and the
 Inspector General of Government resulted in Mpiso's release in
 August 1990.
 Many prisoners held in military barracks are denied a fair
 public trial. Some are held incommunicado. An August tour of
 military barracks by the Inspector General of Government and
 the Minister of Justice revealed that despite denials by the
 Minister of State for Defense, at least 60 civilians are being
 held in military barracks in Kampala. Many did not know the
 nature of the charges against them. In a positive
 development, several prominent NRA officers arrested in
 January on charges of corruption and sedition were brought
 before a military tribunal in October. However, lesser known
 suspects often languish in the barracks for years without
 trial.
 A controversial law, enacted in 1989, that permitted the
 establishment of special magistrates courts in insurgent areas
 was never put into effect. If implemented, the law would have
 eroded many guarantees for a fair trial. Since it was not
 renewed by the NRC in 1990, it is believed to have expired.
 Suspected thieves or other offenders, believed to be caught
 committing a criminal act or possessing stolen property, are
 commonly denied due process, being beaten on the spot by
 accusers and bystanders alike. The beatings are quite severe
 and occasionally result in death. Participation in such "mob
 justice" is rarely if ever prosecuted, even if the suspect is
 killed.
 Other than lodgers, the Government currently holds no
 prisoners for purely political offenses. However, more than
 100 persons are in custody on various treason charges.
 Investigations into several treason cases have dragged on for
 3 or 4 years. In July six persons who had been arrested in
 January 1987 were convicted of treason and sentenced to
 death. The trial, conducted at the Uganda High Court, appears
 to have been fair. The convicted individuals have appealed
 their conviction to the Supreme Court.
 The largest treason case still pending involves 43 suspects,
 including 13 NRA officers. The accused have been on remand
 since their arrest in 1988 and are held in Luzira prison in
 Kampala. The Government alleges that between April and August
 1988, the accused plotted to overthrow the Government by force
 of arms. As in the case of the 6 individuals convicted of
 treason in 1990, most are members of the Baganda tribe.
 Charles Kagenda Atwooki, former Secretary for Information of
 the Uganda Peoples Congress Party (former President Obote's
 party) was acquitted of terrorism and sedition charges in May.
 
 
 UGANDA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Outside areas of insurgency, there is little interference by
 authorities with personal privacy and family life. By law the
 police are required to use search warrants to enter homes even
 in political and security cases. In practice, this
 requirement is often ignored. There is no evidence that
 correspondence is monitored.
 Roadblocks, which had been places of terror under previous
 regimes when unruly soldiers could rob and extort at will, are
 far fewer in number and are no longer sites of abuse.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 The conflict between the Government/NRA and disparate rebel
 groups in the north, east, and far west continued in 1990. In
 February the NRA forcibly displaced over 120,000 civilians
 from their villages in Kumi district in an effort to clear the
 area for sweeps against Uganda Peoples Army (UPA) rebels. The
 civilians were relocated into 12 camps, the largest of which,
 in Ngora, contained 40,000 persons. Adequate provisions for'
 food, potable water, shelter, and medical care were not made
 in advance. Consequently, hundreds of displaced civilians,
 particularly children and the elderly, died from disease and
 exposure before relief agencies were able to correct the
 situation. Diversion of food supplies by corrupt officials
 may have caused hundreds-of additional deaths in April and
 May. In June the ICRC took over food distribution an the
 diversion problem ceased. The camps were ordered disbanded in
 October. By the end of the year, most Kumi civilians had
 returned to their villages.
 Credible sources have implicated elements of the NRA's 306th
 Mobile Brigade in the killihgs of more than 60 civilians in
 Soroti district. NRA soldiers are believed to have been
 behind the burning of a hut containing 20 persons in Ogera
 village, Serere county, on August 10 and the killing of over
 20 civilians from several villages in Arapai subcounty a few
 days later. Reliable reports link elements of the 306th
 Brigade to the September 6 massacre of 21 persons in Madera
 near Soroti town. The victims, all civilians, had their heads
 bashed in with clubs. Three of the victims were women who
 were repeatedly raped before being killed. The army
 commander, Major General Mugisha Muntu, promised a full
 investigation. He transferred the offending units out of Teso
 and ordered the arrest of 30 NRA soldiers suspected of
 involvement in the killings.
 The NRA's failure to bring to justice perpetrators of past
 atrocities casts a shadow over future investigations.
 Although formal commissions of inquiry have been established
 to investigate egregious human rights violations attributed to
 NRA soldiers operating in Gulu in late 1988 and Kumi in
 mid-1989, no result had been announced by the end of 1990.
 The 1989 Kumi atrocities included the notorious death by
 suffocation of 69 Luspected rebels who had been detained in
 railway cars in Mukura. The then NRA commander, General Salim
 Saleh, accepted that the NRA was responsible for the deaths
 and admitted that the civilians killed in the railway case had
 been innocent.
 
 
 438
 UGANDA
 The NRA is governed by a code of conduct which mandates severe
 punishment for soldiers guilty of crimes against civilians.
 In practice, however, prosecutions against soldiers accused of
 atrocities committed while engaged in military operations in
 areas of insurgency are few. Successful prosecutions of NRA
 soldiers for the crimes of rape, murder, and armed robbery not
 committed in the course of combat operations are, however,
 quite common.
 In the north, remnants of the rebel Holy Spirit Movement (HSM)
 continued to terrorize civilians through kidnaping, forced
 recruitment, and summary executions of suspected opponents.
 In March, 43 civilians were hacked to death in Kitgum by one
 HSM band. A common HSM tactic was to raid secondary schools
 to force boys to serve as rebels or porters and girls to serve
 as sexual captives. Those who refused to cooperate were often
 hacked to death. As a result of HSM terror, all schools in
 Kitgum district, except for a few in Kitgum town, were forced
 to close. Hundreds of civilians in the north are believed to
 have died at the hands of the HSM in 1990.
 In the Teso region of eastern Uganda, UPA rebels continued
 their program of terror and assassination against members of
 local government Resistance Councils (RC). Nearly four
 hundred RC officials from Kumi and Soroti districts have been
 assassinated by UPA rebels since 1986. In May, 14 people,
 most of whom were RC executives, were killed by UPA rebels in
 Kaliso county, Soroti district. Like the HSM rebels, the UPA
 rebels survive largely by looting food and other supplies from
 civilians.
 Numerous instances of gunfire directed at civilian vehicles
 passing along main roads in the north and east were reported
 during the year. In June an NRC member and an army captain
 were shot in an ambush while driving in Soroti. Also in June
 an NRC member from Teso was shot in an UPA ambush on the
 Soroti-Moroto road. A few weeks later, an assistant district
 administrator and four others were killed while driving near
 Soroti town. An Italian missionary priest was shot and
 another killed when their car was ambushed by thugs/rebels in
 Kitgum in February. In July the World Food Program (WFP)
 halted relief supplies to Karamoja after a supply convoy was
 attacked by Karamojong raiders. One WFP driver was killed and
 several wounded in the attack. In December the UPA ambushed a
 convoy containing 10 NRC members from Teso, including 2
 government ministers, on the Soroti-Lira road. One soldier
 escorting the convoy was killed; five others were wounded.
 Many such incidents were reported during the year.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech in Uganda is restricted by the ban on
 partisan political activity. Political parties may not hold
 press conferences or organize public rallies. In the 1989
 National Resistance Council elections, candidates were
 prohibited from mentioning their party affiliation.
 Party-based criticism is more freely expressed in the press.
 The Democratic Party (DP) maintains a party newspaper, The
 Citizen, which is often critical of government policy as is a
 pro-DP magazine, The Exposure. DP leaders have tried to
 sidestep the ban on party activity by issuing circulars
 describing the party's positions. Although the practice is
 technically prohibited, the Government has not cracked down on
 it.
 
 
 439
 UGANDA
 Over 15 newspapers publish a wide range of viewpoints covering
 the political spectrum. This coverage includes reporting of
 human rights violations, the civil war, and alleged corruption
 by government and army officials. The Government supports an
 official paper, The New Vision, which, despite its
 affiliation, has reported accurately on allegations of human
 rights abuses by the NRA.
 While criticism of government policies is common, journalists
 know that direct, personal criticism of the President or other
 top NRM leaders is forbidden. Journalistic standards tend to
 be sensational, and some.papers show little regard for
 accuracy. Joseph Kiggundu, former editor of The Citizen,
 faces four libel cases, including one brought by Prime
 Minister Samson Kisekka. Fear of getting tied up in long and
 costly libel suits serves to inhibit some journalists from
 direct criticism of prominent persons. Some human rights
 observers have noted a trend toward greater self-censorship by
 the press. The Government did not detain or charge
 journalists for criticizing the Government.
 In February, however, three journalists were arrested and
 charged with "defamation of a foreign dignitary" for probing
 questions they posed to visiting President Kenneth Kaunda of
 Zambia during a press conference. The questions dealt with
 Kaunda's length of service, Zambia's economic links to South
 Africa, and allegations that Kaunda's son had committed
 murder. After a magistrate ordered the release of one of the
 journalists, Festo Ebongu of The New Vision, Ebongu was
 promptly rearrested and detained illegally without charge.
 The magistrate was then transferred and another brought in to
 reexamine the case. After spending several weeks in custody,
 the defendants were released on bail. By the end of the year,
 despite numerous hearings and court appearances, the cases
 were still dragging on.
 Treason charges against Francis Odida, former editor of the
 defunct magazine Weekly Review, were dismissed in February.
 He was arrested in 1988, apparently for writing an article
 sympathetic to the Holy Spirit rebels, then released on bail.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The ban on the activities of political parties has greatly
 restricted their freedom to operate. In March the NRM
 political commissar reiterated that the ban on political party
 activity will remain in effect "for the duration of the NRM
 interim administration or until the promulgation of the
 Ugandan constitution now in the making." The commissar
 stressed that party rallies, party meetings (other than those
 of the national executive committees of the parties), and the
 collecting of contributions internally or externally on behalf
 of political parties are forbidden. All associations must
 register with the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity and Islam
 are practiced freely. Conversion from one religion to another
 is not obstructed, and there is no government control over
 religious publications. Foreign clergy are welcomed in Uganda
 and are not discriminated against by the Government. While
 religious organizations in general have no difficulty in
 renewing their registrations, in 1990 government authorities
 did not allow the Jehovah's Witnesses to reregister.
 
 
 440
 UGANDA
 Witnesses reported that during the year government authorities
 interrupted at least two large gatherings and ordered
 worshipers to disperse. Witnesses also reported that
 authorities stopped construction of a house of worship in
 Kereka, stating that the Witnesses did not have appropriate
 papers. Residence permits for some American and expatriate
 Witnesses were not renewed in 1990, necessitating their
 departure from Uganda. However, the Prime Minister, Dr.
 Samson Kisekka, intervened on behalf of the Witnesses.
 Ugandan and expatriate Witnesses were received by President
 Museveni at State House in December. By year's end, the
 Witnesses expressed confidence that the Government would act
 to protect their freedom of worship and to end discrimination
 against expatriate witnesses, allowing them to remain in
 Uganda.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In theory, Ugandans may work or live anywhere in the country
 and move about freely within it. In practice, travel in areas
 of northern and eastern Uganda remained difficult due to
 sporadic attacks by rebels and heavily armed bandits.
 Ugandans are free to emigrate and to engage in foreign travel.
 Since the NRM came to power, more than 320,000 Ugandans, who
 had fled to Zaire and Sudan under previous regimes, have
 returned home, as have thousands of Ugandan professionals who
 had fled to Kenya, Europe, and North America. Repatriation of
 Ugandan refugees from Zaire and Sudan was essentially
 completed in 1988 with only limited numbers returning in 1989
 and 1990. Few of the Ugandan refugees remaining in Zaire and
 Sudan have expressed a willingness to return home. The NRM
 policy toward refugees has been generous. About 130,000
 Rwandan, Sudanese, Zairean, and Kenyan refugees are receiving
 some assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR). Thousands more are self-sufficent and are
 integrated with the local population. There were no instances
 of expulsion or forced repatriation of refugees in 1990.
 However, the Government came under international scrutiny in
 1990 for its alleged role in facilitating (either by aiding or
 turning a blind eye to) an invasion from Ugandan soil by
 Rwandan refugees (mainly Tutsis) into Rwanda. There are more
 than 200,000 Rwandan refugees living in Uganda, most of whom
 have been there since 1962. The invasion from the
 southernmost part of Uganda began on October 1. As a result
 of the October invasion, at least 9,000 Rwandans living in the
 affected areas, mainly Tutsis, fled into Uganda fearing
 Rwandan Army reprisals and retribution from the Rwandan Hutu
 population.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Ugandans do not have the right to change their government by
 democratic means. President Yoweri Museveni, who has sought
 no electoral mandate to legitimize his rule, exercises control
 by virtue of his chairmanship of the NRM and support of the
 NRA. Museveni serves as Chief Executive, Minister of Defense,
 and Chairman of the National Resistance Council.
 Unelected "historical" members and presidential appointees
 make up about a quarter of the membership of the NRC. The 38
 "historical" members also dominate the Government's policy
 
 
 UGANDA
 organ, the National Executive Council. NRC members engage in
 open debate and are free to criticize government policy, but
 ultimate power to bring about change rests with President
 Museveni. There are no meaningful checks and balances on
 presidential power.
 A 21-member Constitutional Commission, named in 1989,
 conducted seminars throughout the country to canvass public
 opinion on Uganda's future form of government. The
 consultative process should be completed by the end of 1991,
 and a draft constitution is expected to be ready for debate by
 the end of 1992. President Museveni has pledged that the
 future constitution will be based on the preferences of the
 public rather than on any NRM blueprint.
 In the interim, Museveni has appointed a large and broad-based
 cabinet which includes leaders from all major ethnic,
 religious and political groups. In 1989 he moved to enlarge
 the NRC-which had consisted exclusively of presidential
 appointees-by expanding the body to include elected
 representatives from each of Uganda's 151 counties. Elections
 to the NRC and to local Resistance Councils were competitive,
 and all citizens were eligible to vote or stand for office.
 Voting, however, was not by secret ballot, but rather by
 queuing: citizens openly indicated their preference by lining
 up behind their candidate. Representatives from many tribal,
 religious, and political factions, including prominent persons
 from previous governments, were elected.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Respect for human rights is one of the cardinal principles on
 which the NRM came to power and continues to serve as a basis
 of the regime's legitimacy. The NRM permits local
 organizations to operate. The office of Inspector General of
 Government (IGG) was established by the NRM in 1986 to
 investigate government corruption and human rights abuses
 committed during the current administration. The IGG focused
 its efforts more on the former than on the latter in 1990. As
 previously mentioned, the IGG and the Minister of Justice
 visited military barracks in Kampala in August to investigate
 allegations of inhuman conditions. The deputy IGG also
 examined conditions in barracks in northern Uganda during the
 year and in October published a frank and critical report on
 the state of human rights under the NRM. Despite these
 efforts, the IGG has assumed no role in the investigation of
 human rights abuses attributed to the NRA in the north and
 east, leaving the NRA to police itself. The fact that the IGG
 is presidentially appointed and does not serve a fixed term
 significantly compromises the independence of the office.
 In 1986 the NRM established a human rights commission to
 conduct investigations into human rights abuses committed
 under previous governments. The commission has heard
 testimony from hundreds of witnesses during its travels
 throughout the country. The Criminal Investigative Division
 (CID) and public prosecutor have thus far failed to prosecute
 any of the more than 40 cases referred to them by the
 commission. The commission traveled to northern and eastern
 Uganda late in the year and will begin work in 1991 on a
 report of its findings.
 
 
 442
 UGANDA
 An independent human rights organization, the Uganda Human
 Rights Activists (UHRA), also monitors human rights
 developments in Uganda. While the Government had been hostile
 to the group in previous years, and imprisoned its secretary
 general in 1987-88, relations between them continued to
 improve in 1990. During the year, the UHRA conducted human
 rights seminars, published a magazine, and issued quarterly
 reports on human rights conditions without government
 interference.
 The Uganda Law Society emerged in 1990 as an independent voice
 for human rights. After keeping a low profile in recent
 years, the Society issued a human rights report that
 criticized the NRM for failing to respect the rule of law and
 the independence of the judiciary in a number of instances.
 The report received widespread coverage in the local press.
 The Government is sensitive to international public opinion
 and has shown a willingness to discuss human rights problems
 with various international human rights organizations,
 including in 1990 with representatives of the Committee for
 the Protection of Journalists, the Committee on International
 Human Rights of the Bar of New York, and the U.S. Committee on
 Refugees.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued
 to operate in Uganda in 1990. ICRC delegates visited prisons
 throughout the country and provided relief supplies to.
 civilians in areas of insurgency in the north and east. ICRC
 also conducted human rights seminars for the NRA. ICRC visits
 to detention centers in military barracks were suspended by
 the Government in early 1990, but they had resumed by the end
 of the year.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantu (south), Nilotic
 (north), and Nilo-Hamitic (east)--constitute most of the
 population. Ethnic cleavages, tribalism, and religious
 intolerance underlie much of the cycle of war and political
 strife that has plagued Uganda for decades. The NRM
 Government has publicly repudiated tribalism and has
 introduced policies to prevent discrimination in housing,
 employment, and social services based on race, sex, religion,
 language, or social status. It has advocated national
 reconciliation, stating that all citizens are Ugandans first
 and foremost. This goal is symbolized by efforts to include
 at least one representative from virtually every tribal,
 regional, and religious group in the NRM's 76 member Cabinet.
 NRM policies toward women have been progressive. Women played
 an important role in the NRA's bush war, and in 1988 the NRM
 established a Ministry of Women in Development to design and
 coordinate developmental programs for women nationwide. A
 directorate for women's affairs in the NRM secretariat seeks
 to educate women about their rights and mobilize them to
 participate in the resistance council system. In an effort to
 increase the number of women attending Makerere University,
 the NRM announced plans to give female candidates preferential
 treatment in the admissions process beginning in 1990.
 Women are well represented in resistance councils from the
 grassroots to the Parliament. At the National Resistance
 Council level, 34 seats--one from each district--have been
 
 
 443
 UGANDA
 reserved for women. In addition, three women defeated male
 candidates in the February 1989 general election to the NRC.
 Despite this progress, women are legally discriminated against
 in Uganda. Customary law, which is recognized under the
 present Constitution, discriminates against women. In the
 areas of property rights, inheritance, and custody of children
 a woman is often treated like a minor. The property of a
 married woman is traditionally held in the husband's name.
 When a husband dies, his family (the wife's in-laws) has
 claims on the property and on the custody of the couple's
 children. In cases of divorce and death of a husband, the
 woman often goes away empty-handed. It is easier for a man to
 divorce a-woman than the reverse. A man's claim on the
 custody of children is stronger than his wife's.
 In March President Museveni called on the Ministries of
 Justice and Women in Development to work together to scrap or
 amend all laws that discriminate against women. By year's
 end, the Government had taken several steps to honor the
 President's pledge. On December 19-20, the Ministry of
 Justice, the Ministry of Women in Development, an various
 women's groups sponsored a workshop-to shape proposals for a.
 revision of laws that discriminate against women. The result
 is a comprehensive Women's Rights bill which will be presented
 to the National Resistance Council in 1991. In 1988 the
 Ugandan Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA) opened a legal
 clinic in Kampala which provides counseling and advice to poor
 women.
 The NRM Government does not tolerate violence against women.
 In June the NRC passed a law which would allow the death
 penalty for rape. The law also raised the age of statutory
 rape from 14 to 18. Wife beating is a pervasive problem.  In
 March President Museveni strongly condemned wife beating and
 urged women to report abusive husbands to the police.
 However, fearing divorce or embarrassment, women seldom report
 such abuse to the authorities. Some women continue to view
 wife beating as a customary practice and are not aware that it
 is against the law; FIDA is distributing a leaflet entitled
 "Wife beating is Against the Law" to inform women of their
 rights. A comprehensive study of the pervasiveness of
 domestic violence in Uganda, carried out by two FIDA-Uganda
 researchers with funding from the U.S. Embassy, should be
 completed in early 1991. Female circumcision is not practiced
 by most Ugandan ethnic groups and has been actively
 discouraged by the Government where it does occur, mainly
 among tribes in Eastern Uganda such as the Bagisu.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Under Ugandan law, all workers, with the exception of teachers
 and civil servants, have the right to form unions. In remarks
 made on May 1, President Museveni urged the removal of
 "restrictive labor laws" which hinder freedom of association.
 In August a ministerial committee recommended that civil
 servants and teachers be allowed to unionize and to join the
 National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU). Unionization of
 the civil service has been a principal demand of NOTU for many
 years.
 NOTU is an independent labor federation to which all unions
 are by law affiliated. Membership in NOTU numbers
 approximately 100,000 out of 240,000 workers employed in
 
 
 UGANDA
 private and state-owned industries. Unionization of the civil
 service could add as many as 200,000 to NOTU's rolls.
 Nonetheless, NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains
 marginal since about 90 percent of the Ugandan work force
 consists of peasant farmers. Even among industrial workers,
 high inflation and a lack of transportation have made it
 difficult for individual unions to organize, especially
 outside the major commercial centers of Kampala and Jinja.
 Ugandan law recognizes the right of workers to strike, but the
 Government prefers that they first exhaust more conciliatory
 methods of resolving labor disputes. Strikes by workers of
 Uganda Airways and the Uganda Transport Company during the
 year prompted the management of these state-owned corporations
 to reorganize operations. Nearly 2,000 workers were dismissed
 in the process. Strikes by workers in Kakira Sugar Works in
 Jinja and by interns in Mulago hospital in Kampala were
 settled peacefully.
 There are no restrictions on NOTU's right to associate
 international organizations. NOTU is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions as well as
 the Organization of African Trade Union Unity. In December
 NOTU organized a seminar for the recently established East
 African Trade Union Council.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 by law and established in practice. Unionization and
 collective bargaining are common in the industrial wage
 sector, but are much less significant in the agricultural
 sector. Although the National Union of Plantation and
 Agricultural Workers exists, the vast majority of small
 cultivators organize themselves on the basis of cooperatives
 for the purpose of selling their crops. Union officials are
 not harassed, and unions have access to the Industrial Court.
 The Industrial Court hears and arbitrates trade disputes
 referred to it by either the Minister of Labor or the parties
 involved in the dispute.
 There are no export processing zones in Uganda.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law. However,
 under the NRA code of conduct, soldiers tried by military
 tribunals may be sentenced to forced labor as part of their
 punishment. At present there are no set provisions for
 voluntary departure from the NRA. The Government interprets
 the soldier's commitment as being open-ended. The inability
 to leave the army has resulted in a large number of desertions
 and arrests for desertion.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Most of Uganda's 17 million people live in rural areas on
 subsistence farms. In the modern wage sector the legal
 minimum age for employment is 12 years except for light work,
 which the Minister of Labor may exempt. There are legal
 restrictions on employing persons under 16 years of age in
 mining and night work, except in the case of apprenticeship.
 Enforcement of minimum age restrictions is limited, but few
 children are employed in the wage sector due to the scarcity
 of jobs and the large pool of unemployed adults. Many
 
 
 445
 UGANDA
 children, however, work as market boys, car washers, and
 street vendors in the towns.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The normal workweek is 48 hours. Time and a half must be paid
 for each additional hour worked. There is no maximum
 workweek, nor is there a statutory minimum wage. The
 prevailing minimum wage is $4 per month, whereas a large bunch
 of matooke bananas (a staple crop) costs $2. Anything that
 has to be imported is prohibitively expensive for the average
 wage earner. Thus, workers must find a second job, grow their
 own food, or engage in pilferage or corruption in order to
 feed their families and pay school fees. Labor laws establish
 occupational safety and health standards and call for
 enforcement by the Ministry of Labor. In practice, these are
 seldom enforced, in part due to the lack of inspectors.
 
 
