UGANDA
The State Department's 1993 report on Uganda is generally detailed and accurate — as far as it goes. At times, the report plays down the significance of certain human ri^ts abuses and neglects to place them in a larger political and historical context. Its most serious failing, however, is the outright omission of relevant information. This is reflected in a tendency to follow-up inadequately on the 1992 report and comply with the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the 1993 Country Reports, as well as in a disturbing general pattern of avoiding direct criticism of President Yoweri Museveni.
A case in point that demonstrates both failings is the report's glaring omission of any reference to the involvement of President Museveni and Uganda's National Resistance Army (NRA) with the Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) in the neighboring country's civil war. Responding to changes in the State Department's instructions, and given the lessening of the conflict between the NRA and Ugandan rebel groups, the 1993 report omits the section on the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts. It was precisely this section of the 1992 report, however, that contained allegations that President Museveni and his NRA had allowed the RPF to use southern Uganda as a base of operations. Consequently, the only residual mention of the RPF in the 1993 report is in the section on refiigees, which states that the cease fire in Rwanda allowed for the return of Rwandans to that country. It makes no mention of any deeper institutional relationship between President Museveni's NRA and the RPF.
In fact, the RPF first invaded Rwanda from Uganda on October 1, 1990, when about 7,000 Rwandans, former soldiers m the NRA that brought President Museveni to power in 1986, deserted their posts and entered northern Rwanda. In January 1994, Human Rights Watch/Africa issued a report charging that, "During the past three years the Ugandan government has allowed Rwandese rebels to use its territory as a sanctuary for planning attacks, stockpiling weapons, raising money and moving troops." Human Rights Watch/Africa also named Uganda as a major provider of arms to the RPF and concluded that Uganda should share the blame for human rights abuses committed by the RPF.
Credible evidence of Uganda's role is also provided by the establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR) by Security Council Resolution 846 on June 22, 1993. The UNOMUR is a deployment of international observers on the Ugandan side of the border, with the express purpose of verifying that no military aid crosses the border and reaches rebels inside Rwanda. The failure of the 1993 report to mention the UNOMUR is especially disconcerting in light of explicit instructions from the State Department that the Country Reports should discuss any relevant UN resolutions or investigations.
368
_	UGANDA
With two exceptions, the report's treatment of pohtical and civil liberties is comprehensive and fair. Both exceptions relate to the Ugandan government's curtaihnent of freedom of association and assembly. First, in describing the attempt of the Mobilizers' Group of the Democratic Party to hold a rally in the capital, Kampala, in defiance of a prohibition against political rallies, the report states; "A strong show of force by the police, unchallenged by the mobilizers, blocked the rally." This casual phrasing diminishes both the drama of the event and the personal involvement of President Museveni. On May 7, the day before the planned rally, President Museveni authorized the police to use force to prevent it from taking place and warned opposition members of the interim parliament, "Tell your supporters that they will be killed if they attend political rallies." On May 8, hundreds of armed police set up roadblocks and redirected traffic to cordon off the center of Kampala, while police helicopters flew overhead. The report again uses the mildest of language to describe a second Mobilizers' Group rally that was violently thwarted by police in November.
Second, the report fails to mention President Museveni's response to the formation of the Uganda Islamic Revolutionary Party in May 1993. Just days later, the president announced that he would not allow the party to register legally, asserting that, "We shall not allow religion to be brought into politics."
The report's general assessment of improvements in the human rights situation tends to focus exclusively on the numbers of violations relative to previous years. It should, however, analyze whether or not these improvements are the product of institutional reform, or whether they merely reflect a lessening of internal hostilities or other factors. For example, the report asserts that, "In contrast to past years, there were no reports in 1993 that the NRA committed extrajudicial killings." In April, however, the government-controlled New Vision newspaper reported the discovery of more than 100 decomposing bodies outside an old mortuary in the town of Lira. Lira is located in the northern part of Uganda, which historically has been the site of rebel insurgencies, and the corpses are believed to be those of suspected rebels killed by the NRA,
In cases where government officials admitted past violations of human rights and acted to remedy them, the report is again short on detail. Thus, it states accurately that nine military officers arrested on treason charges between 1988-1990, and subsequently held without trial, were released in August 1993. This unadorned factual account, however, ignores the admirable public admission of past wrongdoing by Uganda's Minister of State for Defense, Amama Mbabazi, who declared that the officers' human rights had been "grossly abused by their long detention without trial." The report also fails to provide appropriate context for a clear understanding of the event. The prisoners' release in fact followed public criticism by Amnesty International of the government's policy of allowing military
369
CRITIQUE 1993
courts to try capital cases, and was accompanied by an announcement that a review would be conducted on all cases of individuals sentenced to death by such courts.
While the report does not sufficiently recognize such efforts on the government's part to make structural changes that will ensure the protection of human ri^ts, it also fails to identify areas of potential official backsliding. In April 1993, for instance. President Museveni ordered the release of 785 prisoners in 11 categories on the advice of the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. While the categories generally included terminally ill prisoners, expectant or nursing mothers, and prisoners convicted of such minor offenses as trespass, tax default and vagrancy, there was also a categoiy for all convicted military personnel who had served one year of their sentences, provided they had not been convicted of a capital crime. The government released 167 prisoners in this category. The report makes no mention of this episode or its possible repercussions for the effective deterrence of human rights abusers.
The report also fails to provide sufficient detail in its discussion of women's rights. On the subject of discrimination in areas such as divorce, the report first mentions "traditional discrimination" under customary law and then says vaguely: "Adultery by men is treated more leniently than adultery by women." The implication that this type of discrimination is merely a cultural remnant is incorrect. In fact, it is a matter of civil law; Uganda's Divorce Act requires a woman seeking a divorce to prove both adultery and some other grounds for divorce such as cruelty or desertion, while it is sufficient for a man to prove adultery.
In the section on fi"eedom of movement within the country, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation," the report neglects to mention the fact that administrative regulations require married women to provide written consent from their husbands before they can obtain a passport from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
In contrast, while the report is correct in noting government efforts to eliminate gender discrimination, it does not go far enough in praising the potential of the draft Constitution to provide the necessary legal backbone. The proposed Article 50(3) of the Bill of Rights would categorically declare that, "Men and women shall be equal under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life."
By focusing its attention on themes such as citizenship rights and the increasing attention to the place of women in the political sphere, the report gives short shift to important health issues for women that are also relevant to their human rights. The 1993 report makes only passing reference to the phenomenon of female genital mutilation, which affects at least five percent of Ugandan women. The Kapchorwa District, inhabited by members of the Sebei ethnic group, has had a law making female circumcision compulsory since 1988. Despite a visit from the Minister of Women in Development to try and discourage the practice, those trying
370
____UGANDA
to avoid it are still abducted and forcibly circumcised by men. Finally, the report compounds its shortcomings in this area by depicting FGM as a problem affecting children rather than women.
371
CRITIQUE 1993
