 UGANDA
 The National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government of President
 Yoweri Museveni came to power on January 26, 1986 by seizing
 control of the capital, Kampala, from the forces of the
 previous 6-month Government of General Tito Okello Lutwa. The
 NRM and its military wing, the National Resistance Army (NRA),
 had fought a 5-year guerrilla war, first against the regime of
 A. Milton Obote and then that of Okello Lutwa. On January 29,
 Museveni formally became President and formed a transitional
 government of national unity which includes representatives of
 all of Uganda's major political parties. The President
 pledged to limit the Government's interim rule to no more than
 4 years, but during this period traditional political party
 activity will not be allowed. The National Resistance
 Council, in theory the supreme governing body, has met
 infrequently, and the day-to-day decisions are made by
 Museveni and the Cabinet.
 The security forces and situation were also in flux. The'NRA
 forms the core of the army in which it is a minority. The
 military is comprised of a number of different groups,
 including some of Idi Amin's former troops. The police force
 has been reduced to 3,000 men. The NRA has proven to be a
 disciplined army, generally not victimizing the populace and
 maintainingd control over the other security units.
 Nevertheless, after relative tranquility the north-central and
 north-eastern regions became unsettled in the last half of
 1986, and extensive military operations continued there,
 involving military opposition from soldiers of former regimes,
 cattle rustling by pastoralist peoples, and simple banditry.
 The high rate of youth unemployment in northern Uganda and the
 traditional tension between the Nilotic peoples of the north
 and the southern Bantu has exacerbated this unrest.
 Despite its excellent economic potential, 23 years of
 turbulence has left the economy in desperate shape. At the
 end of the year, the Government was in a severe financial
 crisis due to poor NRM economic policies which have
 discouraged trade, spurred inflation, and deepened already
 large budget deficits.
 In sharp contrast to the past, Museveni has placed human
 rights at the center of the political process. He has spoken
 out in a variety of forums on this subject, notably in July in
 criticizing the African Heads of State at the Organization of
 African Unity (OAU) Summit for their failure to condemn
 publicly past human rights abuses in Uganda. He also
 established a commission of inquiry into past human rights
 abuses, with a view to prosecuting those responsible.
 Although the NRM has made good progress in reestablishing
 security, a deteriorating economy posed new challenges at the
 end of 1986. Also, in executing pacification operations in
 the north, there were reports that the NRA has been
 responsible for human rights excesses, possibly including
 on-the-spot executions of suspected dissidents.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 It is unlikely that an exact tally of the number of Ugandans
 killed during the final phases of the civil war will ever be
 
 
 245
 UGANDA
 known as it would be virtually impossible to distinguish
 between combat fatalities, incidental deaths, and political
 killings. During the battle of Kampala (January 24-26) there
 were at least two politically motivated killings by forces of
 the Okello regime. An official of the Post and
 Telecommunications Corporation was dragged from his home and
 killed because he was unable to open defective communications
 facilities in the midst of the fighting. Also, Captain George
 Nkwanga of the Federal Democratic Army was murdered,
 reportedly on the orders of former Chief of Defense Forces Lt.
 General Bazilio Olara Okello, after his fighting forces
 switched their allegiance from the Okello Government to the
 NRM side. There were probably numerous other less publicized
 acts of revenge during the rout of the Okello forces.
 There were credible but unconfirmed reports of killings in the
 north either by the NRA or members of other forces now
 incorporated into the NRA. Sporadic fighting continued there
 against a group calling itself the Uganda Democratic Peoples
 Movement (UDPM), which has appealed to the NRM to implement
 the aborted December 1985 Nairobi Peace Accord (under which
 the NRM would have shared power with the various fighting
 forces that constituted the Okello Lutwa regime). The NRM
 rejected negotiations with the UDPM on the grounds that its
 record of human rights violations precluded compromise.
 While the security situation improved markedly, there were a
 number of retributive killings that had political overtones.
 In particular, such killings were fairly common in the section
 of Kampala that had been controlled by Okello's Uganda Freedom
 Army (UFA) prior to the January change of government.
 b. Disappearance
 There were unconfirmed reports of youths in the northern
 Acholi region being abducted by NRA soldiers and
 disappearing. Whether these were related to the fighting or
 the severely depressed economic conditions, or both, was
 unclear.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and inhuman treatment are not sanctioned by Ugandan
 law, but for many years there have been credible reports,
 e.g., Amnesty International's special 1985 report, of extreme
 forms of torture taking place at detention centers,
 particularly in military barracks. Since coming to power the
 NRM has confirmed these reports and opened to the public some
 of the detention and torture centers used by previous
 regimes. Many of these still bore evidence of torture (e.g.,
 blood stains), although it is unclear whether they had been
 used as recently as early 1986.
 Despite the improved situation, the NRA established a number
 of detention centers when in opposition and was accused of
 employing torture in some cases. The NRA still reportedly
 uses an inhuman technique called three-point-tying, in which
 the suspect's arms are tied behind his back until the elbows
 meet. The painful process can result in the asphyxiation of
 the victim or gangrenous infections of the hands and arms.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Museveni Government took steps almost immediately to curb
 
 
 346
 UGANDA
 abuse of citizens' rights by policemen. Early in the year,
 all former soldiers and known abusers were removed from the
 police force, leaving approximately 3,000 police to maintain
 civil order in a population of almost 15 million. The
 weeding-out process has made the proper arrest and charging of
 suspected criminals even more difficult. Providing proper
 training for the police force is also made more difficult by
 the shortage of qualified officers. At the end of the year,
 new officers were being recruited, and the British Government
 planned to resume its police training program.
 All detainees of the Obote and Okello era have been released
 except for Chris Rwakasiisi, who was a minister in Obote's
 Cabinet and head of the notorious National Security Agency
 (NASA). Rwakasiisi has not been formally charged, but he is
 widely believed to have been implicated in NASA's excesses,
 including killings, disappearances, and torture.
 The NRA has detained some suspected dissidents in areas of
 guerrilla activity in the north. The number of detainees and
 the duration of their respective periods of detention are
 unknown. Northerners living in Kampala report that they have
 been harassed and occasionally detained by security forces on
 suspicion of having collaborated with the previous regimes.
 The NRA has also detained a number of persons--mostly NRA
 soldiers accused of criminal activities--at civilian prisons.
 The number has varied between 250 and 600 at any one time.
 The NRA has reportedly detained prisoners of war and members
 of non-NRA fighting forces at military barracks in the
 southern half of the country.
 Prisoners may be required to perform certain types of manual
 labor, such as road maintenance.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In May the Government announced the establishment of a
 commission of inquiry to review all cases of human rights
 violations since independence. The commission is headed by a
 High Court judge and has the authority to summon witnesses and
 to hold both private and public sessions. The Government has
 pledged to seek the extradition of Idi Amin and Milton Obote
 on charges of human rights violations.
 The relationship of the transitional Government to the
 judiciary is still evolving, but the established Ugandan
 judicial system remains in place and contains procedural
 safeguards modeled after British law, including the granting
 of bail, appeals to higher courts, and regular court
 appearances for those being held in detention. There are no
 special courts for political or security cases. Because of
 the tradition of relative independence and impartiality of the
 judicial system, previous regimes have tended to use
 extrajudicial means of detention and punishment.
 There are a number of treason cases currently awaiting trial
 in Kampala courts. In September the NRM arrested a group of
 25 monarchists who were alleged to have plotted the return to
 power of the King (Kabaka) of Buganda. In October the NRM
 arrested 19 people, including the Ministers of Energy,
 Environment, and Commerce as well as a former Vice President
 and several military officers, for allegedly plotting a
 military coup. Human rights groups, such as Amnesty
 International, expressed concern that the 19 suspects had been
 held for a lengthy period without any serious attempt being
 
 
 347
 UGANDA
 made to bring them to trial. The NRM also arrested on charges
 of treason the editors of The Weekend Digest for publishing a
 story that Kenyan guerrillas were operating out of Uganda.
 These treason cases will reportedly be handled in the
 established courts.
 Under the NRM, a number of local "resistance committees" have
 evolved with ill-defined security and other responsibilities,
 including semijudicial functions. A legal issue that has
 developed concerns the right of these committees to mete out
 punishment (usually flogging). In one publicized case, a
 Kampala resistance committee authorized corporal punishment of
 a sugar merchant who charged prices above the legal ceiling.
 The case has inspired wide debate, and a government official
 upheld the legality of the sentence since it had been handed
 down by a committee directly elected by the people.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Undisciplined elements of the previous regime interfered with
 privacy and family through harassment including physical abuse
 and large scale looting. Prior to the battle of Kampala,
 these activities were centered in the capital. As the forces
 of the former government were pushed north they continued to
 plunder and loot, even in their home areas.
 The NRM Government has launched several operations in which
 NRA soldiers cordoned off sections of the capital and searched
 residences and vehicles for unregistered weapons. These
 searches generally have been conducted in a disciplined manner
 and accepted by the populace as a necessary measure to help
 restore law and order after years of virtual anarchy.
 The evolving village or local NRM resistance committees have
 the potential to become neighborhood "watch units" as well as
 the basic political unit of a new Ugandan political structure
 (Section 3). Perhaps more controverial in 1986 were the new
 NRM schools of political education for the purpose of
 indoctrinating key officials with the NRM's leftist ideology.
 These courses have become mandatory for certain civil servants
 but have not been made compulsory for the public at large.
 There are no indications that the NRM, or any other previous
 Government, has interfered with correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There is extensive public debate over the issues of the day,
 especially in the lively press. Uganda has at least 15
 newspapers or newsmagazines that appear on a regular basis.
 Many of these began publication during 1986 and were often
 sharp in their criticism, e.g., of alleged brutalities
 committed by NRA soldiers.
 In principle, the NRM Government favors a free press, but
 officials increasingly criticized journalists for not
 reporting responsibly and for failing to check facts before
 publishing. The Minister of Information stated that there are
 too many newspapers and some consolidation of the various
 journals may be desirable, as well as the creation of a press
 council, composed of newspaper editors, to establish
 professional standards for journalists.
 
 
 348
 UGANDA
 The NRM also took direct action against the press in 1986,
 banning one local newspaper, The Weekend Digest, in June for
 having printed a story suggesting that Kenyan guerrillas were
 operating out of Uganda against the Government of President
 Moi. The editors of the newspaper, Wilson Wandera and Jesse
 Mashate, were arrested, charged with treason, and released on
 bail while awaiting trial. In October the editor of the
 newspaper The Citizen, Anthony Sekweyama, was arrested and
 charged with treason along with 18 other persons. The
 Government has stated that Sekweyama was arrested for his
 alleged participation in a coup plot and not for the
 newspaper's editorial line, which was frequently critical of
 the Government. Subsequent issues of The Citizen since
 Sekweyama's arrest have continued to criticize the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of assembly and association in Uganda is generally
 respected, except that the 4-year ban on partisan political
 activity prevents political parties from organizing rallies
 and other functions at which party officials would speak.
 Political activity has not been banned, but it is not clear
 what form such activity will be allowed to take outside
 political parties. Permits for public gatherings must be
 obtained from police authorities who have the right to deny
 the permit in the interest of public safety. Professional
 associations of doctors, attorneys, engineers, and accountants
 operate without hindrance, as do international associations
 such as the Rotary and Lions Clubs.
 In February the National Organization of Trade Unions
 (NOTU)--Uganda's National Labor Federation--held its first
 free elections since 1981. NOTU and the Federation of Uganda
 Employers came under intense political pressure during the
 Obote period, when they were expected to follow the government
 line and faced competition from government-favored workers'
 councils. NOTU and its constituent unions are currently in
 the process of rehabilitating their regional structures.
 Theoretically, they have the right to engage in collective
 bargaining. The Minister of Labor has stated that the
 Government recognizes the right of workers to strike, but
 disapproves of wildcat strikes and prefers that workers first
 exhaust conciliatory methods of resolving labor-management
 conflict. Since the Okello coup in 1985, trade unions have
 had the right to associate with international labor
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Islam, Christianity,
 and African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not discouraged. There is no
 governmental control of religious publications, even those
 critical of the Government. Religious leaders frequently
 speak out publicly on topics relating to their followers'
 welfare, addressing, in particular, human rights, security,
 and political issues.
 The Uganda People's Congress is to some extent identified with
 the Church of Uganda (Anglican) as the Democratic Party is
 identified with the Roman Catholic Church. However, followers
 of various religions are found in both parties. The NRM as a
 matter of principle is opposed to political parties founded on
 purely religious grounds but has not acted to prohibit them.
 The Ugandan Catholic Church has expressed reservations about
 
 
 349
 UGANDA
 the NRM's schools of political education and other parts of
 its political program as well.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Ugandans are free to move, reside, and choose their place of
 work within the country. In practice, travel to certain
 sections of northern Uganda has been difficult in recent years
 because of unsettled conditions there. The Government has no
 restrictions on foreign travel or emigration. More than
 500,000 persons were displaced by conflict within Uganda
 between 1979 and 1986. The bulk of these displaced persons
 fled to southern Sudan and eastern Zaire from the Madi and
 West Nile regions in 1979 and 1980. In 1984 and 1985 these
 people began to return to Uganda with the assistance of the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In the
 spring of 1986 approximately 90,000 persons repatriated
 themselves to East Madi, in response to attacks on their camps
 in southern Sudan by unknown persons and the improved security
 situation in Uganda. The NRM Government has encouraged the
 displaced persons to return, but an estimated 150,000 to
 200,000 persons remained outside Uganda at the end 1986.
 Uganda has hosted a large number of Banyarwanda displaced
 persons since they left Rwanda during its civil war. These
 persons were placed in UNHCR settlements in southwestern
 Uganda, although a number of them integrated themselves into
 local communities. In 1982-83 the Obote Government
 countenanced an expulsion of these people from their homes
 into camps or back to Rwanda. Approximately 40,000
 Banyarwanda fled to Rwanda where they were housed in UNHCR
 camps. Following the July 1985 coup, the Banyarwanda in
 Rwanda returned to Uganda, some to their former homes, others
 to refugee camps. President Museveni has called for an
 international conference to determine the fate of the
 Banyarwanda displaced persons and has asked them to remain in
 the UNHCR settlements until an official solution is developed.
 The Government has made efforts to resettle the persons
 displaced inside Uganda during its civil war. The potentially
 rich farmlands of the Luwero Triangle--scene of the heaviest
 fighting during the 1981-86 bush war--have been resettled and
 are being rehabilitated with foreign and local assistance
 programs.
 The Karamajong cattle raiders operating out of northeastern
 Uganda have created a population of displaced persons in
 eastern Uganda. To date it has not been possible to resettle
 these people because of prevailing insecurity in the region.
 Approximately 800 Sudanese nationals crossed into Ugandan
 territory during 1986 as a result of the civil war in Sudan.
 The Sudanese have been allowed to stay in Uganda although the
 Government has not decided whether they will be granted formal
 asylum status.
 There were no reported incidents of forcible repatriation of
 foreign refugees in 1986.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the right to change their Government by
 democratic means at present. However, in practice the NRM
 
 
 350
 UGANDA
 Government is a nonelected, broad-based coalition in which all
 of Uganda's major political parties are represented in the
 Cabinet. The NRM is the dominant partner and comprises most
 of the membership of the theoretically supreme governing body,
 the National Resistance Council (NRC), the successor to
 Uganda's National Assembly (parliament). President Yoweri
 Museveni is the dominant figure in Ugandan politics; he is
 also chairman of the NRM. Museveni has pledged that the
 interim Government will not remain in power more than 4
 years. During this interim period a new constitution will be
 drafted, and at the end of the 4 year period Ugandans will
 choose their new government. At the end of 1986, only local
 or village resistance committees had begun to take some
 shape. While the NRC existed, it had been largely bypassed as
 a decisionmaking body.
 Uganda is thus entering another period of political
 transition. The cornerstone of the NRM Government's political
 program is the formation of the resistance committee system.
 These bodies are elected at local levels to serve as a
 democratic form of local governance. Each resistance
 committee elects some of its members to a higher level of
 administration, which will eventually create a six-tier
 structure with the village committees at the bottom and the
 National Resistance Council at the top.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The NRM is proud of its human rights record and has indicated
 it is willing to accept visits by organizations such as
 Amnesty International. Uganda has taken a prominent role in
 speaking out on human rights issues in international forums.
 President Museveni argued at the July OAU summit that the
 general principle of noninterference in the internal affairs
 of another state should not be used as a pretext to "shield
 genocide from censure." Similarly, Prime Minister Samson
 Kisekka criticized the United Nations and the OAU for failing
 to condemn violations of the Universal Declaration of Human
 Rights. On August 18 Uganda became the 28th member of the OAU
 to sign the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The country's boundaries cut across contiguous tribal areas
 and group together mutually distrustful ethnic groups.
 Historical animosities between ethnic groups have been
 exacerbated by Uganda's political problems and, in particular,
 by the ruination of the country's economic and political
 infrastructure during the Amin years, from which the country
 has not recovered. Particularly damaging was the 1972
 expulsion of an estimated 70,000 persons of Asian heritage who
 comprised the backbone of Uganda's entrepreneurial and skilled
 trade resources. The cumulative result of Uganda's long-term
 ethnic civil conflict has been a breakdown of the country's
 social fabric. Two ethnic groups, the Banyarwanda and the
 Karamajong, commonly are subject to discrimination in delivery
 of the Government's economic and social services. The
 Karamajong, who live in northeastern Uganda, have experienced
 indiscriminate military action directed against them in
 reprisal for violent cattle raiding by tribal members.
 After long years in opposition, the NRM espouses a philosophy
 
 
 351
 UGANDA
 of nondiscrimination and, since coming to power, it has made
 elimination of sectarianism and corruption the central points
 of its political program. However, with fighting continuing
 in the north and the economy in disastrous shape, corruption
 remains rampant, and social and economic services are often
 delivered on the basis of ethnic or familial favoritism.
 Women are not legally discriminated against or officially
 restricted from education or employment.
 While there is no legal discrimination against women, their
 access to education has been declining as families are
 withdrawing daughters rather than sons from school during the
 current difficult economic circumstances. Women played an
 important part in the NRA's bush war, serving as soldiers,
 intelligence operatives, and support personnel. There are two
 female deputy ministers in the NRM Government, as well as a
 number of female ambassadors and members of the National
 Resistance Council. In March Mary Kikonyogo was appointed the
 first woman to be a judge on Uganda's High Court. The NRM has
 created a women's secretariat charged with educating and
 politicizing Ugandan women.
 One of the most vexing of Uganda's human rights problems is
 the dilemma of the boy soldiers (Kadogo). These
 preadolescents (some are as young as 6 years) were taken into
 the NRA during the period of the bush war. Most are orphans
 of villagers killed in the fighting. Rather than leave them
 to an uncertain fate in destroyed villages, the NRA chose to
 take the children along and assigned each boy to a more senior
 soldier who became, in effect, the child's guardian. The
 children fought in the civil war and were highly visible in
 the January battle for Kampala. They are still to be seen on
 the streets of Kampala in uniform and carrying weapons.
 Critics argue that the children should resume--or in some
 cases commence--their school education.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The bulk of Uganda's almost 15 million people live in rural
 areas, on subsistence farms. In the modern sector, the law
 sets the minimum age for employment at 12 years except on
 light work which the Minister of Labor may exempt by statutory
 order. In addition, there are restrictions for employing
 persons under 16 years of age in mining and in any night work,
 except in the case of apprenticeship. The minimum wage is
 that of the lowest paid person employed by the Kampala City
 Council, which at the end of 1986 was less than $6.50 per
 month. Medical care is to be provided by employers. The
 legal workweek is a maximum of 48 hours. In practice because
 of the serious decline in the economy, there is little effort
 at enforcement of labor laws,
 
 
 352
 U.S.OV-ERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: UGANDA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         9.1      9.0    14.8
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    9.1      9.0     14.8
 A.AID ....... ............     9.1      9.0     14.B
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    9.1      9.0     14.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..          0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER E:ON. ASSIST,...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      3.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......   ..... 0.1         3.0      0.0
 A.4AP  GRANTS ..........       O.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.0      0.0
 ).TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON, & MIL...         9.2      9.0     14.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    9.2      9.0     14.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   164.8    102.2      0.0    756.0
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0      8.4
 IFC                2.9      0.0      0.0     15.8
 IDA              123.0     71.9      0.0    559.9
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD3                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              38.1     17.7      0.0     83.0
 UNDP               0.8      2.3      0.0     57.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0     10.3      0.0     31.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 353
