UGANDA
The report on Uganda presents a detailed account of the major human rights issues of 1989. The report accurately notes, for example, that fighting between government and rebel forces declined towards the end of year, leading to fewer extrajudicial killings. Major events and problems are described in detail, a variety of sources are used and the report reaches and states its own conclusions. The report, however, does not adequately describe government human rights institutions, as well as certain government measures that have undermined basic freedoms and judicial independence.
The report should have described in more depth the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Office of the Inspector General of Government (IGG), the two key human rights institutions that the government has established over the past several years to promote and protect human rights. The report mistakenly notes that the IGG was established in 1986; it was in fact set up by an Act of Parliament in March, 1988. The office is charged with the duty of ". . . protecting and promoting the protection of human rights and the rule of law in Uganda, and eliminating and fostering the elimination of corruption and abuse of public offices . . . The office is required to investigate human rights abuses committed by government officials. Its secondary functions involve the investigation of reports of corruption in public offices.
In reality, however, the IGG has spent most of its time looking into corruption issues, and not human rights abuses. This has raised questions about the IGG's effectiveness and independence from the executive and the army (National Resistance Army, NRA). Although the office is young, human rights groups believe that it has avoided addressing human rights abuses because NRA soldiers are often responsible. The office has shown timidity in pursuing responsible soldiers because of the power that they wield within the NRA. While it is true that the office needs more staff and resources to be effective, the report should have clearly pointed out the office's reluctance to investigate human rights abuses where military involvement or responsibility may be at issue.
The one overwhelming weakness of the office is the lack of even theoretical independence from the President. The empowering act provides that the Inspector-General". . . shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other authority, but shall be directly responsible to the President." The President appoints the Inspector
235
Uganda
General and the IGG must submit periodic reports of findings and recommendations to the President. The legislature, on the other hand, can only see a summary of such reports twice a year. These constraints are compounded by the IGG's lack of authority to prosecute individuals it has investigated. The IGG's reports are also confidential. The State Department should have pointed out these limitations which indicate why the office has not been as effective as it should be.
The report should also have described the limitations on the Human Rights Commission which was set up in 1986 to investigate human rights violations from 1962-86. By the end of 1989, the Commission had traveled to most areas of the country, except for a few conflict spots in the north and east, and had interviewed hundreds of citizens and accumulated valuable information. But the Commission continued to be beset by a number of constraints, including lack of adequate resources, inadequate cooperation from the police and lack of cooperation from former senior and mid-level government officials. Its hearings were, however, well publicized in the print and broadcast media throughout the year. The Commission is expected to recommend further investigation and prosecution of named suspects where adequate evidence is available. It is also expected to issue a report on causes and patterns of human rights abuses over the past 24 years, and make recommendations on measures to prevent a recurrence of such abuses. Though hobbled, the Commission is the first serious government human rights initiative since independence.
The report mentions the formation in February 1989 of the Constitutional Commission whose aim is to involve all Ugandans in the drafting of a new constitution. The Commission is expected to travel to all counties in Uganda and invite citizens to present their views. It has two years to complete this process. However, by the end of the year the Commission had barely started functioning. Some Ugandans remained skeptical about the Commission, especially after the Yoweri Museveni government extended its interim period of governance for an additional five years in October.
The report correctly outlines the dangers posed to guarantees to a fair trial by the magistrates bill passed by the government in June. The bill denies bail, allows uncorroborated evidence and hearsay to be used in trials, permits the shifting of the burden of proof from accuser to accused, and allows soldiers to sit as magistrates. The bill offends concepts of fairness and undermines judicial independence.
236
Uganda
The bill was designed to end the detention of "lodgers" -- suspected rebels or sympathizers — in conflict areas or in any area deemed by the President to be in an insurgency. By the end of the year, the bill had not been put into effect.
The report correctly notes that the government took measures to end the problem of "lodgers" by releasing most of them. In addition, the report paints an accurate picture of continuing reports of torture by security forces and the usurpation of police functions by the NRA. Human rights abuses committed by rebel groups are also included and described accurately.
The report documents incidents of killings by government forces. A particularly troubling incident occurred in Gulu in December 1988 where NRA soldiers killed 88 civilians, 45 of them in a grass hut which was set alight. In July 1989 NRA soldiers again killed at least 69 suspected rebels in Kumi district, by suffocating them in railway cars. The government has set up commissions of inquiry to investigate these and other abuses, but by year's end no findings had been announced and no prosecutions initiated. The report should have stated that commissions of inquiry have not been effective in general, and have been used as a pretext to quiet public outcry over abuses.
With reference to freedom of speech and press, the report gives a fair account, except it fails to note that independent newspapers started to exercise more self-censorship in 1989. This was particularly true in cases involving senior NRA officers implicated in corruption and human rights abuses. Although the Ugandan press remained the liveliest in the region, reporters became more cautious.
The State Department report accurately describes human rights conditions in Uganda, although it fails to assess correctly the lack of independence and effectiveness in government human rights efforts. As civil strife subsides and peace is reestablished, it is important for the report to evaluate accurately the effects of government efforts to create respect for the rule of law.
237
