 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni, elected to a 5-year term in 1996 under the 1995 Con-
 stitution, continued to dominate the Government. He has ruled since 1986 through
 the National Resistance Movement (NRM), legislatively reorganized and renamed as
 "The Movement." The 1995 Constitution provides for a 276-member unicameral par-
 liament and an autonomous, independently elected president. The Constitution for-
 eally extended the one-party movement form of government for 5 years and se-
 verely restricted political activities. A national referendum on the role of multiple
 political parties is scheduled for 2000, following a 1-year campaign period. The Par-
 liament acted with greater independence during the year, although Movement sup-
 portera remained in control of the legislative branch. Parliamentarians were elected
 to 5-year terms in 1996. Local government elections completed in April were peace-
 ful and technically orderly. The 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections were
 also p eaceful and orderly, but election onditions, including restrictions on political
 party activities, led to a flawed election process. The judiciary is generally independ-
 ent, but understaffed and we.ak; the President has extensive legal and extralegal
 powers.
 The Uganda People's Defense Force (UPDF) is the key security force. The Con-
 stitution provides for civilian control of the UPDF, with the President designated
 as commander-in-chief. The UPDF's largely successfufl demobilization program,
 which concluded in 1996, was reversed in part due to the increasing instability in
 the north and west. The Government continued to reactivate soldiers throughout the
 year. UPDF soldiers and members of Local Defense Units (LDU's) assist the police
 in rural areas, although the LDU's continue to operate without a legal mandate.
 The Internal Security Organization (ISO) remained under the direct authority of the
 President. Although the ISO is primarily an intelligence-gathering body, its
 operatives occasionally detained civilians. The Directorate of Military Intelligence
 (DM1), under UPDF control, also detained civilians suspected of rebel activity. The
 UPDF, police, LDU's, and the DM1 all committed human rights abuses.
 The economy again grew at a rate of 5 percent during the fiscal year ending June
 30. Annual Gross Domestic Product is $270 (283500 shillings) per capita; foreign
 economic assistance provides approximately 55 percent of government revenues. The
 agriculturally based economy continued to rely on coffee as its chief export. Eco-
 nomic reforms encouraged investment in spite of growing warnings about corrupt
 practices alleged by parliamentarians, journalists, and the public, and despite the
 
 
 440
 Government's flawed process of divesting parastatals, including telecommunications
 and transport. The privatization process was damaged by significant levels of cor-
 ruption, investigated by Parliament, which led to the resignation of the President's
 brother from government and the minister in charge of the process. The financial
 sector improved somewhat, assisted by increased personal savings. The Government
 continued its reforms in the banking industry and commercial law. However, the
 stock exchange remained severely underutilized.
 There continued to be numerous, serious problems in the Government's human
 rights record; the Government's record improved slightly in some areas, but deterio-
 rated in others. Movement domination of the political process limits the right of citi-
 zens to change their government. Security forces used excessive force, at times re-
 sulting in death. Government forces committed or failed to prevent some
 extrajudicial killings of suspected rebels and civilians. Police, UPDF, LDU, and DMI
 forces regularly beat and sometimes tortured suspects, often to force confessions.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life-threatening. Members of the security
 forces sometimes arbitrarily arrested and detained civilians. There were numerous
 cases in which the Government detained and charged UPDF and LDU members for
 human rights abuses. Authorities used incommunicado detention and detention in
 unregistered and unofficial places of remand without notification to their family
 members. However, despite measures to improve the discipline and training of secu-
 rity forces, and despite the punishment of some security force officials guilty of
 abuses, these abuses by the security forces remained a problem throughout the
 country. Prolonged pretrial detention remained a problem. Poor judicial administra-
 tion, lack of resources, a large case backlog, and lengthy trial delays circumscribed
 due process and the right to a fair trial. The UPDF at times infringed on citizens'
 privacy rights; it often invaded private citizens' homes without warrants. The Gov-
 ernment demonstrated increased respect for freedom of speech and of the press, al-
 though there were some instances in which restrictions continued. It restricted free-
 dom of assembly and association, and the 1995 Constitution extended previously ex-
 isting restrictions on political activity for an additional 5 years, effectively limiting
 these rights further. Late in the year, the Government arrested a political opponent
 for public remarks at a seminar and charged him with sedition. He was released
 on bail. The Government used police and ISO personnel to disperse politically ori-
 ented gatherings on a number of occasions during the year. There were some limits
 on freedom of movement. The Government created a Movement secretariat, sup-
 ported with governmental funds, to oversee internal organizational activity, strat-
 egy, and mobilization, and the Government continued its Movement political edu-
 cation courses. Discrimination against women, the disabled, and ethnic minorities
 persists. Domestic violence, rape, and abuse of children remained serious problems.
 The Government worked with NGO's to combat the practice of female genital muti-
 lation (FGM), which occurred on a limited basis. Forced labor occurs, and child labor
 was common, mostly in the informal sector. Vigilante justice was a problem.
 Insurgent forces committed numerous serious abuses. The Lord's Resistance Army
 (LRA), led by Joseph Kony, operated in the north from bases in southern Sudan.
 The LRA continued to kill, torture, maim, rape, and abduct large numbers of civil-
 ians, virtually enslaving numerous children. Although its levels of activity dimin-
 ished somewhat compared with 1997, the area that the LRA targeted grew. The Al-
 lied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group active in the west, increased its activity
 significantly, killing and abducting many persons. An ADF-affiliated group, the Na-
 tional Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU), also claimed responsibility for
 terrorist attacks that resulted in fatalities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 politically motivated killings by government forces. However, members of the secu-
 rity forces and the police committed extrajudicial killings. In the course of official
 operations, police, UPDF, LDU, and DMI personnel sometimes used excessive force,
 resulting in deaths. In January police reportedly killed four robbery suspects in
 Luwero after holding them for 3 days in detention. In July police fired on students
 at the Kabalega secondary school, killing one student. In January a 25-year-old sus-
 pect accused of stealing a bicycle died in police custody in Tororo after being tor-
 tured by officers. On August 31, a prison official in Masaka beat a suspect on re-
 mand to death for defaulting on tax payments. He was apparently struck several
 times with a hoe while working in a prison field. Police opened investigations into
 each of the above cases, but no one had been prosecuted by year's end. Authorities
 charged three police officers with deaths of two civilians in July in Kikondo.
 
 
 Muslim groups complained of extensive mistreatment by security officials in Kam-
 pala and the west. There were unconfirmed reports that some of the Muslims sus-
 pected of being ADF rebel collaborators or involved in terrorist activities died as a
 result of torture by DMI officials (see Sections 1.c. and 1.d.).
 In August two civilians died while in the custody of a LDU in Kyankwanzi. The
 LDU commander responsible was arrested and remained on remand awaiting trial
 at year's end.
 The UPDF killed and injured innocent civilians while combating rebel forces (see
 Section 1.g.).
 Harsh conditions, some intentional mistreatment, and lack of adequate medical
 treatment caused many deaths in prison (see Section l.c.).
 Investigations into the 1997 deaths by torture of Paul Kollo and Stephan
 Baryakaijika were completed, and the cases are scheduled to be heard by the
 Human Rights Commission in 1999. A suspect arrested for the 1997 killing of
 Modesta Kabaranga, a leading organizer for the Democratic Party, was still on re-
 mand awaiting trial at year's end. There has not yet been a police investigation in
 the 1997 killings of Addullah Buwuula, Mubarek Mawejje, and Amir Sinai at year's
 end.
 Vigilante justice was a problem (see Sections 1.c. and 5). Authorities rarely pros-
 ecuted persons engaged in mob violence, which on occasion resulted in death. Resi-
 dents of Nyabweya, Kabarole district, stoned to death a convicted rapist on parole
 after he allegedly raped an 8-year-old girl. An angry mob in Bukhaweka, Mbale dis-
 trict killed an LDU official for stealing a cow. In January a group of Iganga district
 residents tracked down and killed a murder suspect.
 Sudanese armed forces' aircraft bombed a refugee camp on the Sudan-Uganda
 border in August, killing two persons (see Section 2.d.).
 The rebel LRA was responsible for the killing of more than 200 civilians, includ-
 ing children (see Section 1.g.). LRA forces also continued to target local government
 officials and employees. During the year, the LRA also targeted international hu-
 manitarian convoys and local nongovernmental organization workers. The ADF com-
 mitted approximately 400 extrajudicial killings (see Section 1.g.).
 Urban bombings were a problem during the year. In April three bombings killed
 nine persons in Kampala. In July two bombings of bars in Kampala killed two per-
 sons. In August 28 persons were killed when bombs detonated on three different
 buses traveling from Kampala. The National Army for the Liberation of Uganda, an
 ADF-affiliated group, claimed responsibility for several of the bombings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed reports of politically-motivated dis-
 appearances due to action by government forces. A number of Muslims whom the
 authorities suspected of supporting the ADF insurgency were detained and are still
 missing. It was believed that security officials were responsible for their detention
 (see Section 1.c.).
 There were unverified reports that a number of Rwandan and Congolese refugees
 who entered the country disappeared by mid-year, allegedly due to detention by ISO
 and security officials.
 LRA rebels in the north abducted local officials and other local government em-
 ployees during the year, although at a decreased level from 1997. There were abduc-
 tions of local officials in the west as well, at the hands of ADF rebels (see Section
 "naddition, both the LRA and ADF abducted large numbers of civilians for train-
 ing as guerrillas; most victims were children and young adults. The LRA abducted
 young girls as sex and labor slaves. Other children, mainly girls, were reported to
 have been sold, traded, or given as gifts by the LRA to arms dealers in Sudan (see
 Section 6.c.). While some later escaped or were rescued, the whereabouts of many
 children remain unknown.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits "any form of torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment or punishment"; however, security forces commonly beat and sometimes tor-
 tured criminal suspects, often to force confessions. UPDF forces in the north also
 allegedly beat civilians.
 A former NRM major reportedly was detained on August 5 by Kampala police on
 suspicion of terrorist activity. Police blindfolded him and took him to an unregis-
 tered detention facility. There the police reportedly beat him with metal and elec-
 trical cables and handcuffed him to a toilet, where he remained for over 2 weeks.
 Other persons suspected of rebel activity reportedly were also detained in similar
 conditions. The Government did not release details of its investigation in the case.
 In January a suspect accused of stealing a bicycle died in police custody in Tororo
 after being tortured by officers (see Section l.a.).
 
 
 442
 In June police attacked and dispersed a political seminar, injuring about six
 attendees (see Sections 2.b. and 4).
 UPDF soldiers in Busia district detained two brothers on suspicion of robbery;
 they were taken into custody and beaten by the soldiers in an effort to gain a con-
 fession. They were released the next day without charge. Human Rights Watch re-
 ported that UPDF soldiers tortured treason suspects, beat them with chains, and
 burned them. There were also reports that police tortured Muslim detainees (see
 Section 1.d.).
 The police occasionally treat criminal suspects in an inhuman and degrading man-
 ner; in one such incident in November, police stripped a man naked while interro-
 gating him, and allowed the interrogation to be filmed and broadcast on local news
 programs.
 LDIUs, which frequently lack training, are guilty more often than police of mis-
 treatment of prisoners and detainees. For example, in August two civilians died
 while in LDU custody (see Section L.a.). Although there have no authority to do so,
 LDU's continued to make arrests (see Section l.d.).
 The Government investigated some cases of abuse, trying and punishing some of-
 fenders. Early in the year, the police established a human rights desk within the
 organization. A panel of four attorneys hears public complaints daily and is empow-
 ered to take action against officials determined by the panel to be guilty of an of-
 fense. Since its establishment, the desk has received approximately 50 cases and
 complaints detailing abuses. Approximately 20 of those cases resulted in discipli-
 nary actions, including reductions in rank, fines, halted promotions, and dismissals.
 Several cases have also been referred to the criminal courts.
 In conjunction with the Government-sponsored Uganda Human Rights Commis-
 sion (UHRC), the police force commenced a training program for police officials to
 foster respect for internationally recognized human rights standards. The UHRC
 conducted a similar program with UPDF officials throughout the year.
 There were no follow-up investigations into the case of 18 UPDF soldiers arrested
 in the Gulu district for beating 21 civilians. The investigations into the 1997 torture
 of Corporal Twasha Kaushera and the 1997 deaths by torture of Paul Kollo and
 Stephan Baryakaijika were completed, and the cases are scheduled to be heard by
 the Human Rights Commission in 1999.
 There continued to be unconfirmed reports that UPDF mobile forces beat civilians
 regularly and raped women (see Section 1.g.).
 There were numerous instances in which mobs attacked suspected thieves and
 other offenders caught in the commission of crimes (see Section L.a.). Often moti-
 vated by widespread distrust of the justice system, these mobs engaged in stoning,
 beatings, and other forms of mistreatment, such as tying suspects' wrists and ankles
 together behind their backs, stripping suspects of their clothes and parading them
 through the streets, or forcing suspects to hop painfully on the sides of their ankles.
 Prostitutes who dress 'indecently" or "provocatively" also have been stripped by
 vigilantes.
 The LRA continues to maim and rape civilians, and loot and burn private homes,
 as does the ADF. The LRA also abducted children to be guerrillas and tortured
 them by beating them, raping them, forcing them to march until collapse, and deny-
 ing them adequate food, water, or shelter (see Section 1.g.).
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Conditions for the esti-
 mated 5,000 inmates in local police cells, generally worse than those in the prisons
 themselves, were characterized in a report by the UHRC as "degrading and inhu-
 man." The local prison system, formerly operated by the Ministry of Local Govern-
 ment, was absorbed in mid-year by the state-funded and operated prison system,
 run by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Conditions are particularly harsh in the 133
 former local prisons, although they began to receive central government funding for
 the first time during the year. Although the law states that civilians cannot be held
 in military barracks, civilians continued to be detained in barracks, often without
 trial (see Section 1.d.). Both civilian and military prisons have high mortality rates
 from overcrowding, malnutrition, diseases spread by unsanitary conditions, and
 HIV/AIDS.
 No accurate estimates are available on the number of deaths in detention due to
 the harsh conditions and lack of medical care, although many such deaths have oc-
 curred and there are reports that several treason suspects died while in prison. The
 UHRC reported severely inadequate medical services, seriously unhygienic condi-
 tions, and a situation of "semi-starvation" among prisoners in many prisons. In Jan-
 uary, 5 inmates died and 42 fell critically il at Ibuga prison in Kasese as the result
 of an outbreak of dysentery. A prisoner reportedly starved to death in Arua district
 in January. Four West Nile Bank Front (WNBF) rebels died in Luzira prison, alleg-
 
 
 443
 edly due to poor medical conditions. Cholera took the lives of three prisoners in Jan-
 uary, also at Luzira prison.
 The harsh conditions largely result from the Governments seriously inadequate
 funding of prison facilities. Most of the prisons grow maize, millet, and vegetables,
 although the UHRC accused prison farms of overworking inmates, who often re-
 ceived only $.001 (1 shilling) per day for their labor. Prison conditions come closest
 to meeting minimum international standards in Kampala, where prisons provide
 medical care, running water, and sanitation. However, these prisons are also among
 the most overcrowded. By one estimate, the country's prisons-all of which predate
 independence in 1962-hold about 3 times their maximum        planned capacity.
 Human rights groups, including the Uganda Law Reform Commission and the
 Uganda Prisoners Aid Foundation, continued to call for expanded noncustodial sen-
 tencing-an effort generally blocked by strongly punitive attitudes among judges, in
 part motivated by ear of accusations of corruption if prisoners appear to be treated
 leniently. Although the law provides for access to prisoners by their families, igno-
 rance of this right and fear of prison authorities often limit family visits. The UHRC
 reported that it had received allegations that officers in charge of police cells some-
 times demanded bribes to allow visits.
 Women have segregated wings in most, but not all prisons, with female staff. Ac-
 cording to human rights advocates, rape generally is not a problem, although female
 prisoners also suffer from severely substandard conditions. Due to lack of space in
 juvenile facilities, juveniles often are kept in prison with adults. The central prison
 system maintains one juvenile prison and two lower security reformatory halls.
 School facilities and health clinics in all three institutions are defunct; prisoners as
 young as age 12 perform manual labor from dawn until dusk. Severe overcrowding
 is also a problem at these juvenile detention facilities and women's wings. Adminis-
 trators reported in 1997 that one juvenile institution with a capacity of 45 children
 actually held 173.
 The central prison system in 1996 launched a 3-year program to improve prison
 buildings, water and sanitation systems, food, and uniforms. Mast of the items used
 in this program are made within the prison system itself. The program's progress
 has been marginal in most prisons, due in large measure to inadequate funding.
 Government agencies have sponsored or participated in numerous conferences on
 the justice system and prison conditions. Government agencies also worked closely
 with international and domestic human rights organizations on prison reform ef-
 forts. Revision of the Prisons Act neared completion, but had not been enacted by
 year's end. The proposal to integrate the central and local prisons was implemented
 officially in June; however, real integration has yet to occur. Conditions in the for-
 merly local prisons have changed little since the merger.
 Media access to prisons remained limited, but the Government permitted full ac-
 cess to prisons by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and local
 NGO's, principally the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Foundation for
 Human Rights Initiative, and the Uganda Prisoners' Aid Foundation. UHRC access
 to prison facilities initially was granted in mid-1997; since that time, the organiza-
 tion has carried out numerous prison visits and reported on its findings publicly.
 Prison authorities require advance notification of visits, a process that is often sub-
 ject to administrative delays.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exi/e.-Members of the security forces at times
 arrested and detained citizens arbitrarily. According to the Constitution, a suspect
 must be charged within 48 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or released on
 bail within 120 days (360 days for a capital offense). If the case has been committed
 to the court before the expiration of this period, the Constitution does not limit pre-
 trial detention. The Constitution also provides that detainees should immediately be
 informed of the reasons for their detention. In practice, however, the authorities en-
 forced none of these requirements. Other laws conflict with the Constitution, such
 as the Public Order and Security Act of 1967 (the Detention Order), which provides
 for unlimited detention without charge; however, these laws never have been in-
 voked formally by the Government. Legal and human rights groups, including the
 IJHRC, sharply criticized the excessive length of detention without trial-in many
 cases amounting to several years--for alleged offenses under other laws, which both
 violated the constitutional rights of the detainees and contributed substantially to
 prison overcrowding.
 Arbitrary arrest is a problem. In particular, complaints from Muslim groups re-
 garding arrests targeted at young Muslims on suspicion that they supported rebel
 groups, increased during the year. Between April and September, approximately 100
 Muslim men were arrested by unidentified officials at their places of residence, busi-
 ness, and public places. The men detained wvere denied due process, and held in uan-
 official, unregistered places of remand. Some were to ed (see Section 1.c.). The
 
 
 444
 
 UHRC on June 4 publicly called for the release of the men, claiming that such de-
 tention was both illegal and a violation of their constitutional rights. The Ministry
 of Internal Affairs 1 week later released a partial list of those on remand, trans-
 ferred them to registered, or gazetted, places of detention and formally charged
 them-with treason. The Ministry's list indicated that those under detention were
 suspected of collaboration with rebel or terrorist groups known to be operating in
 the country. The wives of some of the remaining, unconfrmed detainees dem-
 onstrated publicly in Kampala, which led to the release of some of those missing;
 however, a substantial number (perhaps 30--40) still remain unaccounted for. Ac-
 cording to unconfirmed reports, DM officials held those who still were missing, and
 used physical torture on them to gain confessions and implicate other Muslim sus-
 pects (also see Sections l.a. and 1.c.).
 At least one apparentiy politically motivated arrest was confirmed: in December
 officials arrested Karuhanga Chapaa, leader of the National -Democrats' Forum, an
 opposition group, for remarks made at a public seminar (see Section 2.a.).
 Although they have no legal authority to make arrests, LDUs continued to arrest
 citizens. On June 25, 30 persons were arrested arbitrarily by LDU and police per-
 sonnel in Lubaga division while watching a World Cup match on television. They
 were released without charge after relatives were asked to pay $15 (15750 shillings)
 to $20 (21000 shillings) each to procure their release from detention.
 Pretrial detainees comprise nearly three-fourths of the prison population. The av-
 erage time in pretrial detention is from 2 to 3 years. At year's end, there were ap-
 proximately 20,000 prisoners in the newly combined prison system, most of whom
 are on pretrial remand. Over 10,000 of the 15,000 persons being held in the central
 prisons fall into this category, with a far worse situation in the recently absorbed
 local prisons, which hold a total of 5,000 detainees. Congestion and delay in the
 legal system have resulted in an increasing number of detainees each year.
 Although the law prohibits the detention of civilians in military barracks, citizens
 continue to be detained in barracks, often without trial (see Section 1.c.). Civilians
 detained in military barracks almost invariably are deprived of a fair, civilian trial.
 The actual number of such detainees is unknown, but there are believed to be fewer
 than 4,000. Efforts to verify these conditions reportedly were hampered by inten-
 tional concealment of detained civilians. Security forces also held civilian detainees
 in unofficial, unregistered places of remand, mostly on suspicion of collusion with
 rebel groups and participation in terrorist attacks. Verification of the situation in
 military facilities improved somewhat during the year; the UHRC actively utilized
 its access to military places of detention (see Section 1.c.).
 The Government does not use exile as a means of political control A presidential
 amnesty for former LRA and WNBF rebels remains in effect, although those who
 return risk capture and violence by mobs or the        adPDF.
 e. Denial oflFair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, the President has extensive legal and extralegal powers that influ-
 ence the exercise of this independence. The President nominates, for the approval
 of Parliament, members of the Judicial Service Commission, which makes rec-
 ommendations on appointments o the High Court, the Court of Appeal, and the Su-
 preme Court. The end of a 4-year long hiring freeze in midyear saw some improve-
 ment in the ability of the courts to function, but they remained understaffed and
 weak. Senior positions in the highest courts were filled in November aftr prolonged
 vacancies.
 The highest court is the Supreme Court, followed by (in descending order) the
 Court of Appeal (which also functions as the Constitutional Court for cases of first
 instance involving constitutional issues), the High Court, the chief magistrate's
 court, local council (LC) 3 (subcounty), LC 2 (parish), and LC 1 (village). A minimum
 of six justices may sit on the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal or Constitu-
 tional Court. Although once considered a useful innovation, the LC courts often are
 thought to be sources of injustice due to such factors as bribery and male dominance
 in rural areas. In addition there are a few specialized courts that deal with indus-
 trial and other matters. The Industrial Court (IC), which arbitrates labor disputes,
 is structurally parallel to the chief magistrate's court
 At the lower end of the judicial system, the local village councils have the author-
 ity to settle civil disputes, including land ownership and payment of debts. These
 courts, often the only ones available to villagers, frequently exceed their authority
 by hearing criminal cases, including murder and rape. LC decisions may be ap-
 pealed to magistrate's courts, but often there are no records made of the case at the
 village level, and many defendants are not aware of their right to appeal.
 The cilooan judicial system contains procedural safeguards, including the grant-
 ing of bail and appeals to higher courts. However, the right to a fair trial has been
 circumscribed for many years by an inadequate system of judicial administration
 
 
 445
 and lack of resources, resulting in a serious backlog of cases. The courts, like other
 branches of government, were impaired by 4-year-long civil service hiring freeze,
 which was only somewhat relaxed. As a result, criminal cases may take 2 years or
 more to reach the courts. The case backlog remains extremely large; in particular
 the backlog of criminal cases in the High Court has increased every year since 1993.
 Attorneys working in the office of the public prosecutor can be assigned several new
 cases each day. Some courts continued to observe the Constitutionally prescribed
 limits on pretrial detention, but that practice was not widespread.
 Many defendants cannot afford legal representation. The Constitution requires
 that the Government provide an attorney for indigent defendants accused of capital
 offenses, but there is rarely enough money to retain adequate counsel. The Uganda
 Law Society (ULS) operates legal aid clinics in four regional offices. It assists mili-
 tary defendants as well as civilians. The Uganda chapter of Federacion
 Internacional de Abogadas (FIDA) and the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative
 also practice public-interest law from offices in Kampala. The Law Development
 Center is in the process of establishing a legal aid clinic to address cases involving
 children and those accused of petty crimes.
 The military court system does not assure the right to a fair trial. Although the
 accused has the right to retain legal counsel, military defense attorneys often are
 untrained and may be assigned by the military command, which also appoints the
 prosecutor and the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military court,
 which can include the death penalty, may be appealed to the High Command, but
 not to the High or Supreme Courts. A court-martial of appeal was established in
 1997.
 In January the Supreme Court overturned a Constitutional Court decision that
 had demonstrated marked independence from the Government. In 1997 the Con-
 stitutional Court had ruled against the Government and held that Major General
 David Tinyefuza could resign from the Uganda People's Defense Force (UPDF).
 Tinyefuza alleged that the Government and military sources had harassed him after
 he accused the Government of human rights abuses in parliamentary testimony.
 The President refused to accept his 1996 resignation from the UPDF. The Supreme
 Court upheld the Government's position and declared Tinyefuza's resignation null
 and void.
 The Government continued to arrest and charge persons for treason, especially
 captured rebel fighters, in numbers greater than the judicial system could manage.
 In the past, numerous human rights abuses were committed in connection with
 treason cases, including political detentions, detentions without charge, detention in
 unregistered and unofficial places of remand, and mistreatment, including torture.
 There were reports that at times such abuses continued during the year. Prison offi-
 cials put the number of those on remand on the charge of treason at 1,163. Those
 on remand for this charge include suspected WNBF rebels, members of the Islamic
 Tabliq sect (suspected of supporting ADF rebels), and 35 other suspects detained on
 charges relating to bombings in Kampala during the year. Authorities detained ap-
 proximately 28 children on treason charges during the year, although all had been
 released by year's end.
 The number of political prisoners is unknown but believed to be small. Bright
 Gabula Africa, whose death sentence for treason was upheld by the Supreme Court
 in 1995, remains imprisoned pending the outcome of his appeal to the Advisory
 Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy, a largely autonomous constitutional body
 that recommends whether presidential clemency powers should be exercised in a
 given case. In February the Advisory Committee rejected an appeal for clemency
 from the death penalty in the case of All Fadul. Fadul, a former army commander
 under the regime of former dictator Idi Amin, was convicted on murder charges in
 1981.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the protection of privacy, which the Government generally
 observes; however, there were some exceptions. The law requires that police have
 search warrants before entering private homes or offices, and the police generally
 observed this law in practice, although in its effort to combat the rebels in the
 north, the UPDF often invaded private homes without warrants. LDU's arrest citi-
 zens without authority. The police sometimes searched vehicles without prior war-
 rants. Prison officials routinely censor the mail of prisoners.
 According to press reports, the Government required that employees in selected
 ministries and offices register their political affiliation in writing (see Section 3).
 During the conflict with the LRA, government forces used threats to compel citi-
 zens to leave their homes and move to areas under government protection (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.) Thousands of persons remain internally displaced as a result of rebel ac-
 tivity (see Section 2.d.).
 
 
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Reports of violations of humanitarian law decreased somewhat in the north,
 but increased in the west. In the north, government forces continued their policy
 of concentrating inhabitants in so-called '"protected villages" with UPDF detach-
 ments nearby as a means of protecting them and denying support to the LRA. This
 policy continues to be attacked by parliamentarians from the area, although less ve-
 hemently than before since almost all relocations appeared to be voluntary. Some
 residents of villages in close proximity to the protected villages sometimes return
 by day to plant or tend crops, although there are reports that authorities sometimes
 do not allow residents to go to work on their farms. The villages originally were es-
 tablished hastily and without coordination with civil authorities, and lacked appro-
 priate water and electrical supplies as well as health and educational services; they
 rapidly were beset by hunger and disease, which killed numerous residents. Al-
 though substantial NGO and donor community assistance has improved the overall
 conditions in the villages, conditions still remain poor. Despite the villages' con-
 troversial beginnings, most residents express a reluctance to return to their villages
 without UPDF protection.
 Use of excessive force by the UPDF in combatin the rebels resulted in the injury
 and death of innocent civilians. On March 1, UPDF forces reportedly killed 30
 Acholi children abducted by the LRA in Ogok village, Kitgum district, while combat-
 ing suspected LRA rebels there.
 In the north, forces of the LRA, led by Joseph Kony, and supported by the Govern-
 ment of Sudan, regularly attacked civilian and some military targets, as well as
 some refugee camps. These attacks caused more than 200 deaths and the destruc-
 tion of homes and property. The LRA continued to kill, maim, rape, and abduct
 large numbers of civilians. LRA activity decreased somewhat compared with 1997,
 but covered a larger area. Incidents involving mutilation continued, but decreased
 in frequency. In particular, the LRA abducted numerous children and, at clandes-
 tine bases, terrorized them into virtual slavery as guards, concubines, and soldiers.
 In addition to being beaten, raped, and forced to march until exhausted, abducted
 children were forced to participate in the killing of other children who had at-
 tempted to escape..
 Amnesty International reported that without child abductions, the LRA would
 have few combatants. More than 6,000 children were abducted during the year, al-
 though many of those abducted later escaped or were released. Most human rights
 NGO's place the number of abducted children still held captive by the LRA at
 around 3,000, although estimates vary substantially. Kitgum district officials said
 in September that 231 rimary school children had been abducted by the LRA over
 the preceding 12 months in that district alone. LRA rebels attacked civilians in
 Pader subcounty in Kitgum district in February, cutting  ff the ears of seven of
 their victims. In June IRA rebels attacked St. Charles Lwnga College in Kitgum
 district and abducted 39 young girls, most of whom are still unaccounted for.
 LRA rebels attacked food convoys from the Worid Food Program (WFP) and
 Oxfam in Kitgum. LRA rebels also planted land mines on roads and village paths
 in Gulu and Kitgum district throughout the year. Land mines on the few roads to
 the Sudan border hinder the transport of food to internally displaced persons and
 to the 150,000 to 200,000 Sudanese refugees who remain in camps there. Land
 mines on village paths reduced agricultural production, local trade, and injured
 mostly women and children.
 In the west and southwest, the rebel Allied Democratic Forces significantly
 heightened their activities, which included repeated attacks on civilian targets, trad-
 ing centers, and private homes, resulting in hundreds of deaths and abductions. The
 DF continued to plant land mines extensively and increased its attacks on both
 rural and urban civilian targets, police outposts, and UPDF encampments. In Feb-
 ruary 30 students were abducted by ADF rebels from Mitandi Seventh Day Advent-
 ist College in Kasese. In April rebels attacked a woman in Bundibugyo district and
 cut off her ears and nose. The ADF forces hacked two civilian women to death in
 Kasese district in May. The ADF's deadliest attack of the year occurred on June 8,
 when rebels killed 80 -students of the Kichwamba Technical College in Kabarole dis-
 trict by setting locked dormitories on fire. An additional 80 students were abducted
 in the raid. Also in June, ADF rebels abducted over 100 school children from a
 school in Hoima district. ADF conducted dozens of small-scale raids that resulted
 in hundreds of civilian deaths. An ADF-affiliated group, the National Army for the
 Liberation of Uganda claimed responsibility for three bus bomb attacks in August
 that killed 30 persons.
 WNBF attacks resumed during the year in the northwestern region bordering
 Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo, and more than 100 abductions in
 Arua district. The majority of those taken in subsequent raids over a week-long pe-
 
 
 447
 riod later escaped and returned to their homes. In November VWNBF rebels killed
 and decapitated a Muslim religious leader in Arua, reportedly in retaliation for his
 son's defection from the WNBF ranks. The Uganda Salvation Front/Army carried
 out an attack on a police station and prison facility near Tororo in the east in Au-
 gust in which it abducted 110 prisoners. Members of the Uganda National Rescue
 Front-II (UNRF-II) also carried out a number of abductions and killings in the
 northwest. The UNRF-II attacked a WFP vehicle in Moyo and killed a WFP driver
 in September.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the Press, and the Government demonstrated increased respect for these
 rights, although there were instances in which the Government infringed on those
 rights. In November the Government ordered the arrest of Karuhanga Chapaa, lead-
 er of the National Democrats' Forum, over public remarks that he had made criticiz-
 ing the President and accusing him of complicity in corrupt practices. He was
 charged with sedition and remained free on bail at year's end. His case is scheduled
 to be heard in early 1999.
 The New Vision, a Government-funded daily newspaper with a daily circulation
 of 40,000 (and up to 10 readers sharing each copy), and the government-controlled
 Radio Uganda continued to play major roles in the media. These news sources were
 of a fairly high quality and sometimes included reporting critical of the Government.
 During the elections for local council members that concluded in April, the-New Vi-
 sion exhibited a clear pro-NRM editorial bias and gave more prominent attention
 to NRM supporters running for office.
 The media are generally free and outspoken, with widespread availability of rival
 nongovernmental publications. The independent Monitor newspaper equaled the
 New Vision's circulation and often printed articles and editorial opinions critical of
 the Government. The Crusader, another independent newspaper, continued to im-
 prove its credibility. The East African, a Nairobi, Kenya-based weekly publication
 that provides extensive reporting on Uganda, continued to circulate without govern-
 ment hindrance. In November the Government detained the editor of the Crusader
 and a reporter for the government-owned New Vision following the publication of
 reports critical of some government policies in the President's home tribal area of
 Ankole. The Crusader editor, George Lugalambi, was charged with "promoting sec-
 tarianism" in violation of the law. He remained free at year's end, and his case is
 scheduled to be heard in early 1999. The New Vision reporter was freed without
 charge. Authorities also searched the offices of the Crusader and seized documents.
 The cases against journalists Muasazi-Namiti, Hassan Kato, Charles Onyango-
 Obbo, and Andrew Muanda for disseminating false information were still pending
 at year's end. All four journalists remained free on bail.
 The Government controls one television station and Radio Uganda, the radio sta-
 tion having the largest audience. At year's end, there were more than 15 radio sta-
 tions throughout the country. There are four local television stations and more than
 a dozen private television stations available via satellite. The number of independ-
 ent media broadcast sources increased during the year. Several independent broad-
 cast media air daily political talk shows in several languages, very often critical of
 the Government and individual government officials, including the President. High-
 ranking government officials often participated in these programs, and debated
 issues with political opponents. There was no censorship of these programs.
 The Press and Media Law, which took effect in 1995, requires journalists to be
 licensed and to meet certain standards, including holding a university degree. The
 law provides for a Media Council to suspend newspapers and to deny access to state
 information. Despite the Media Council, government officials do not vigorously en-
 force the law.
 The Uganda Journalists' Safety Committee (UJSC), a media monitoring group,
 filed suit in the Constitutional Court in 1997 against the sedition laws and the
 Press and Media Law. The High Court began hearings on the suit in late 1997. The
 UJSC claimed that the laws violated constitutional protections. The Constitutional
 Court dismissed the suit in December 1997, finding that it constituted an improper
 filing. The Government had argued that the UJSC had not been harmed by the law;
 3 years after its enactment, its provisions have not been used against any journalist.
 Uncensored Internet access is widely available through three commercial service
 providers in major cities, although the cost for connectivity is prohibitive for all but
 the most affluent noninstitutional users.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at the two public and five pri-
 vate universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or publica-
 
 
 tion. Students and faculty have sponsored wide-ranging political debates in open fo-
 rums on campus.
 Political education and military science courses known as Chaka Mchaka resumed
 during the year. These courses are criticized as indoctrination in Movement political
 philosophy. There were lingering reports that the techniques used in some of the
 courses included intimidation, physical and mental abuse, and sexual harassment.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government restricts this right in practice. The Con-
 stitution bans political parties from holding national conventions, issuing platforms,
 endorsing candidates, or opening branch offices outside the capital until 2000. The
 Constitution also forbids other activities that would interfere with the Movement
 System, an elastic provision that the Government in the past has interpreted ad-
 versely to political groups' interests. The Government denied or failed to respond to
 requests for assembly permits by opposition political groups, and actively broke up
 other meetingq determined to be of a political nature opposed to the Movement Sys-
 tem.
 The Government used its riot police and ISO personnel to disperse a June 19
 meeting in the eastern city of Tororo, injuring about six persons. The Foundation
 for African Development (FAD), affiliated with the Democratic Party, organized the
 program, and advertised it as a civic education meeting. On July 6, police and the
 highest ranking central government official there, the Resident District Commis-
 sioner (RDC), blocked a similar FAD program in Kamuli district. On July 10, riot
 police dispersed a FAD seminar in Mbarara. The RDC in July refused a permit for
 another proposed FAD meeting in Hoima district. Other gatherings organized by the
 Uganda Young Democrats also were dispersed by police, ISO, anTRDC officials. The
 police also broke up a peaceful protest in Kampala led by army veterans who de-
 manded back pay and benefits.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but the Government restricts
 this right in practice. NGO's are required to register with the Nongovernmental Or-
 ganizations Board, which includes representation from the Ministry of Internal Af-
 fairs as well as other ministries. The Government generally approves NGO registra-
 tion, although there have been instances in the past in which NGO's considered to
 be opposed to the Government politically have encountered serious difficulties in ob-
 taining registration.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution protects freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. There is no state religion.
 Mosques operate freely, Koranic schools are common, and Muslims occupy positions
 of authority in local and central government. Prisoners are given the opportunity
 to pray on the day appropriate to their faith. Muslim prisoners usually are released
 from work duties during the month of Ramadan. However, authorities, including the
 Directorate of Military Intelligence, detained Muslims suspected of rebel activity in
 unregistered, unofficial places of remand. Security forces continued to harass Mus-
 lims. Between April andSeptember, approximately 100 Muslim men were detained
 and some were tortured. There was no clear indication that the religion of the vic-
 tims was a factor in this detention or torture. Many of those detained were released
 but the whereabouts of 30 to 40 remain unknown (see Sections L.a., 1.c., and 1.d.).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respected them in practice, although there were some limits. Some local offi-
 cials reportedly demanded payment of fees for permission to change a place of resi-
 dence. A married woman must obtain her husband's written permission on her pass-
 port application if children are traveling on her passport (see Section 5).
 There are no laws that provide for the granting of refugee or asylee status in ac-
 cordance with the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of
 Refugees and its 1967 Protocol; however, the Government does grant such status in
 practice. The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and with other humanitarian organizations in
 assisting refugees. As it has repeatedly done in past years, Uganda continued to
 provide first asylum as well as land for temporary resettlement to citizens from
 neighboring countries, extending this practice to approximately 188,000 refugees
 during the year. The majority of refugees continue to be from southern Sudan, but
 there are smaller numbers from other neighboring countries as well. In midyear
 small numbers of refugees fleeing fighting in the eastern part of the Democratic Re-
 public of Congo (DROC) crossed into the country, but returned soon thereafter. In
 December approximately 3,000 Congolese crossed into the southwest, also fleeing
 the conflict in eastern DROC. At year's end, they remained in the country pending
 transfer to estabished refugee camps. There were no reports offorced return of per-
 sons to a country where they feared persecution.
 
 
 The Government continued to increase security in refugee camps during the year.
 While there were no reports of large-scale attacks by rebel groups on the camps,
 as there had been in 1997, there were several instances of attacks, rapes, harass-
 ment, and looting by rebels directed at refugees, causing several serious injuries and
 deaths. For example, 15 refugees were abducted from the Pakelle refugee camp in
 Adjumani district by LRA rebels on May 29. The day before, nearby Amuri refugee
 camp had been raided by LRA rebels; four were killed and a number were abducted.
 Aircraft belonging to the Sudanese armed forces bombed a refugee camp on the
 Sudan-Uganda border in August, killing 2 persons. LRA attacks on refugee camps
 generally resulted in some deaths and abductions (see Section 1.g.).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Movement domination of the Government and the political process, and some re-
 strictive constitutional provisions, limited citizens' effective exercise of the right to
 change their government. The President dominates the Government, and Movement
 supporters remained in control of the Parliament, although the legislature con-
 ducted business in a more independent manner during the year.
 The Government established, at government expense, the Movement Secretariat,
 an organization that roughly paralleled existing government institutions and is lim-
 ited to those professing support for the Movement. Political education classes called
 Chaka Mchaka continued to be offered to the public (see Section 2.a.). The Govern-
 ment prohibited all other non-Movement political gatherings. At mid-year, the Gov-
 ernment began to require that civil service employees in selected ministries and of-
 fices, including the Ministry of Information and the President's office, register in
 writing their political affiliation (see Section 1.f.). Gatherings deemed to be of a po-
 litical nature not sanctioned by the Movement were broken up by police and ISO
 officials on a number of occasions (see Section 2.b.). The Constitution bans political
 parties from holding national conventions, issuing platforms, endorsing candidates,
 or opening offices outside of the capital. A referendum is scheduled to be held in
 2000 to consider lifting these restrictions.
 Local government elections completed in April were peaceful, orderly, and tech-
 nically transparent. However, the election process was flawed by the prohibition on
 political parties from actively organizing and fielding candidates, although a number
 of Movement incumbents were unseated, including the Mayor of Kampala.
 Universal suffrage is accorded to adults 18 years of age and older. Contrary to
 the Constitution, the right to vote was denied to prisoners. A total of 10 seats in
 Parliament are reserved for members of the UPDF.
 The Constitution provides for five seats in Parliament for representatives of per-
 sons with disabilities, as well as five reserved seats for youth representatives, and
 three seats for representatives of organized labor. Individual parliamentarians who
 claim non-Movement Party affiliation fully participate in the legislature.
 Women play a visible role in national affairs, although women are underrep-
 resented in government and politics. The Government used quotas in an aggressive
 effort to place women in positions of authority. Women continued to make stronger
 contributions in Parliament and inside the Movement. The Vice President is a
 woman, as are 5 ministers in the President's 25-member Cabinet. In addition each
 of the nation's 45 districts, including six new districts created in 1997, elected a
 woman to fill a National Assembly seat reserved for women by the provisions of the
 Constitution. Six other women won openly contested seats for the 276-member Par-
 liament in the 1996 election. The 1997 Local Government Act reserves one-third of
 the seats on local councils for women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous human rights groups operate. Among them are: The Foundation for
 Human Rights Initiative; the Uganda Chapter of FIDA; the Uganda Prisoners' Aid
 Foundation, which monitors prison conditions; the National Organization for Civic
 Education and Election Monitoring, which deals with problems related to civil soci-
 ety and political rights; Human Rights Focus, based in the northern town of Gulu;
 the National Association of Women's Organizations of Uganda (NAWOU), an um-
 brella group; the International Federation of Human Rights; and the Human Rights
 and Peace Center, based at Makerere University. These groups operate without gov-
 erment restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights
 cases. Hurinet, a human rights network and an umbrella organization for nine
 human rights organizations active in the country, also continued to be active.
 
 
 450
 The Government also allowed access by international human rights NGO's, in-
 cluding Amnesty International and the ICRC. The Government also cooperated with
 the UNHCR.
 Government officials generally were cooperative and responsive to NGO views.
 They frequently attended conferences and seminars hosted by NGO's on social prob-
 lems. However, in June and July the Government actively dispersed meetings and
 seminars held by the Foundation for African Development (see Section 2.b.). The
 Government continued to cooperate with NGO's on legal and prison reforms.
 The 1995 Constitution established the UHRC as a permanent independent body
 with quasijudicial powers. The UHRC filed its first annual report in August, report-
 ing on the 1997 calendar year. Under the Constitution, the UHRC may subpoena
 information and order the release of detainees and the payment of compensation for
 abuses. The UHRC convened its human rights court for the first time in November
 in an exercise of those powers, and called 12 cases before it, including ones in which
 the defendants were senior government leaders and military and police officials. The
 UHRC does not have the power to intervene in cases pending before a court. The
 UHRC inspected numerous detention facilities and publicly reported on its findings.
 The UHRCs 1997 report was submitted as required by law to the speaker of Par-
 liament concurrent with its public release. Members of the UHRC's eight-member
 board are appointed by the President.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on these factors, but the Govern-
 ment does not effectively enforce the law in matters of locally or culturally accepted
 discrimination against women, children, people with disabilities, or certain ethnic
 groups. Race was not a factor in national politics. The continued instability in the
 north led to violations of the rights of many Acholi, the ethnic group that comprises
 a significant part of the population. Most violations of Acholi rights resulted from
 LRA actions.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, remained common. There were
 no laws passed to protect women against battery, although there is a general law
 concerning assault. In 1997 the Government began to implement the Children's
 Statute, which provides extensive protections for families and children. However,
 implementation during the year proved exceedingly difficult, in view of manpower
 and judicial constraints; in reality, little was done to enforce the statute's provisions.
 Law enforcement officials, consistent with general public opinion, continued to view
 wife beating as a husband's prerogative and rarely intervened in cases of domestic
 violence. Women remained more likely to sue for divorce than to file assault charges
 against their husbands while still married. These problems received growing public
 attention. Numerous NGO's that advocate women's rights sponsored conferences,
 empowerment sessions, and training programs throughout the country. In a promi-
 nent 1997 case in which an Asia? woman, Renu Joshi, allegedly was murdered by
 her relatives including her husband, court proceedings had not concluded by year's
 end. Her husband (the principal defendant) and Kooky Sharma, remained on re-
 mand awaiting trial at year's end. Public protests were instrumental in keeping
 Sharma in remand. Such a delay in bringing capital offense cases to trial is common
 (see Section 1.d.).
 Traditional and widespread societal discrimination against women continued, es-
 pecially in rural areas, despite constitutional provisions to the contrary. Many cus-
 tomary laws discriminate against women in the areas of adoption, marriage, divorce,
 and inheritance. In most areas, women may not own or inherit property, nor retain
 custody of their children under local customary law. Divorce law sets stricter evi-
 dentiary standards for women to prove adultery. Polygyny is legal under both cus-
 tomary and Islamic law, and a wife has no legal status to prevent her husband from
 marrying another wife. Men may also "inheri' the widows of their deceased broth-
 ers. Women do most of the agricultural work but own only 7 percent of the agricul-
 tural land. There are limits on a married woman's ability to travel abroad with" her
 children (see Section 2.d.).
 There are active women's rights groups, including FIDA, Action for Development,
 the National Association of Women Judges of Uganda (NAWJ), the Forum for
 Women in Democracy, and NAWOU, which promote greater awareness of the rights
 of women and children. The FIDA is conducting a 3-year project to reform outdated
 and discriminatory laws, and the NAWJ continued to disseminate its guidebook on
 women's rights and options concerning domestic violence to women throughout the
 country.
 Numerous women were victims of abduction and rape by rebel forces (see Sections
 1.c. and 1.g.).
 
 
 Children.-Although it has devoted only limited funds to children's welfare, the
 Government demonstrated a commitment to improving children's welfare. The Uni-
 versal Primary Education (UPE) program continued to expand its reach. The pro-
 gram is intended to provide free education through seventh grade for a maximum
 of four children per family. The UPE program remains only partially implemented,
 the result of strained finances, instability in some areas, and infrastructure prob-
 lems. The training of teachers to adequate minimum educational levels was also a
 contributing problem. Although the UPE program makes education more accessible
 financially, parents still must pay for books, uniforms, and some school costs. Imple-
 mentation of the UPE has caused some financial problems for the country's large,
 often polygynous families. Girls and boys theoretically have equal access to edu-
 cation, and lower grades are divided about evenly by sex. Families traditionally
 have favored boys when making financially related educational decisions; the pro-
 portion of girls at higher school grades remains low. Only 53 percent of females are
 literate compared with 61 percent of males. Parents' inability to afford schooling in
 the past has correlated highly with child labor in rural areas (see Section 6.d.).
 About 55 percent of school-age children are in school.
 The Government has not yet implemented effectively the 1996 Children's Statute,
 which outlines broad protections for children. Government efforts were hampered by
 the large proportion of the population that is below 18, manpower and fiscal con-
 stralnts on the judiciary, and cultural norms. These factors all contributed to the
 lack of progress duringthe year to enforce the statute's provisions. The law stipu-
 lates parents' responsibilities and provides extensive protections for children" in a
 wide variety of areas, including financial support, foster care placement, adoption,
 determination of parentage, and treatment of children charged with offenses. It also
 includes concise provisions on the rights of the child, including a provision that a
 child shall not be made to work or take part in any activity, whether for pay or
 not, that is likely to injure the child's health, education, mental, physical, or moral
 development. However, the Government has been unable to enforce prohibitions on
 child labor, particularly in the informal sector (see Section 6.d.).
 Estimates place the number of orphaned children (children missing either parent
 are considered orphans) at up to 1.4 million. This large number of orphans resulted
 from previous civil wars, the internal displacement of persons, and HIV/AIDS.
 Child abuse remained a serious problem, particularly the rape of young girls
 (known locally as "defilementS'). Only a small fraction of these incidents is reported,
 especially when the perpetrator is a family member, neighbor, or teacher-as is
 often the case. Increasing numbers of accusations reach the courts, although neither
 conviction nor punishment was common. Cases were reported frequently in news-
 papers, but a payment to the girl's parents often ended the matter. Despite these
 obstacles, an increasing number of cases are being prosecuted. While defilement car-
 ries a maximum sentence of death, that punishment has never been meted out to
 a convicted rapist. Courts in September sentenced a convicted "defile? to 21 years'
 imprisonment-the most severe punishment for that charge yet imposed. "Defile-
 ment" applies to all cases of sexual contact outside of marriage involving girls
 younger than 18 years of age, regardiess of consent or the age of the perpetrator.
 The marriage of young girls by parental arrangement is common, especially in rural
 areas.
 Many schools use corporal punishment, although in 1997 the Government banned
 the beating of secondary school students. In January a Kampala court convicted Jo-
 seph Mbuga, former headmaster of Bulenga secondary school, of assaulting his stu-
 dent and causing physical injury. The court fined him $300 (350,000 shillings), or
 in the case of default, sentenced him to 6 months in prison. In July a teacher from
 Mubende was arrested by police for beating a primary school student for not com-
 pleting his homework. The beating left the child in a coma for several weeks. The
 teacher was released following 3 days' detention and an agreement to pay all hos-
 pital bills and undisclosed damages to the parents. The 1996 case in which a teach-
 er in Masaka beat to death a 15-year-old student was still pending at year's end.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is practiced
 only by the Sabyni tribe, located in the highly rural Kapchorwa district in the east,
 whose members number fewer than 10,000. Among the Sabyni, initiation cere-
 monies involving FGM have been carried out every 2 years for girls between the
 ages of 14 and 16 years. Such a ceremony was held in December, but there were
 no reliable statistics as to the number of girls circumcised during the ceremony.
 There is no law agalnst the practice, but government and women's groups working
 with the U.N. Population Fund continue to carry out a program to combat the prac-
 tice through education. The program, which has received strong governmental sup-
 port and support from local Kapchorwa leaders, was expanded and continues to de-
 
 
 452
 
 crease the numbers of mutilations performed. The program emphasizes close co-
 operation with traditional authority figures and peer counseling. Significant press
 attention to these ongoing efforts brought public attention to the problem through-
 out the year.
 The Children's Statute provides that children, with disabilities be treated and
 . necessary special facilities-a provision hampered in execution by inadequate
 fudng.
 The LRA abducted many children, using them as guards, laborers, soldiers, and
 for forced sex (see Section 1.g.).
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution provides that persons with disabilities
 have 'a right to respect and human dignity" and requires that authorities take ap-
 propriate measures "to ensure that they realize their full mental and physical poten-
 tial." However, despite this provision, there is no statutory requirement for govern-
 ment services or facilities such as accessibility of buildings for the disabled. Most
 buildings have one story, but in larger towns with multistory buildings, there are
 often no elevators; even where they do exist, they are rarely reliable. Widespread
 discrimination by society and employers limits job and educational opportunities for
 those with physical disabilities. In August the Government appointed a Minister of
 State for Disabled Persons. A Department for Disabled Persons also exists under the
 Ministry of Local Government. In reality, however, these bodies and positions have
 little funding to undertake or support any initiatives.
 National/Racial[Ethnic Minorities.-Civil strife -in the north led to the violation
 of the rights of many members of the Acholi tribe, which is largely resident in the
 northern districts of Gulu and Kitgum. Both government forces and the LRA
 rebels-who themselves largely are Acholi--committed violations. LRA fighters in
 particular were implicated in the killing, maiming, and kidnaping of Alcholi tribe
 members, although the number and severity of their attacks decreased somewhat
 compared with 1997 (see Section 1.g.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of every per-
 son to join workers' associations or trade unions, and the law allows unionization
 if a majority of the work force supports it. In practice the Government respects the
 right to form unions, and since 1993 this right has extended to civil servants. How-
 ever, many "essential" government employees are not permitted to form unions;
 these include the police, army, permanent secretaries in the ministries, heads of de-
 partments and state-owned enterprises, school principals, and other management
 level officials. However, the Government has failed to enforce the rights of some em-
 ployees to join unions in recently privatized industries and factories. Organized
 labor has three reserved parliamentary seats.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), the largest labor federation,
 includes 17 unions and is independent of the Government and political parties.
 Among its members are medical workers, including doctors, and the civil service
 union. The NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains small, since about 90
 percent of the work force are peasant farmers. Even in areas in which cash crops
 are significant, unionization has remained practically nonexistent. NOTU member-
 ship declined steadily from some 500,000 in the 1970's to about 100,000.
 The Constitution confirms the right to strike, but government policy requires that
 labor and management make "every effort" to reconcile labor disputes before resort-
 ing to strike action. This directive presents unions with a complicated set of restric-
 tions. If reconciliation does not seem possible, labor must submit its grievances and
 notice to strike to the Minister of Labor, who usually delegates the dispute to the
 Industrial Court (IC). In the absence of verdicts from the IC, the Minister of Labor
 generally did not permit strikes, on the basis that "every effort" had not been ex-
 hausted. Frustrated laborers often went on strike anyway, protesting credibly that
 they were not paid a wage adequate to live on.
 There were eight notable strike actions during the year. A strike and demonstra-
 tion by the taxi drivers union was broken up by riot police in Kampala in July; some
 of those arrested subsequently were charged with treason, a capital offense.
 Labor unions freely exercised the right to affiliate with and participate in regional
 and international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 to organize and bargain collectively, specifying that a workplace may be unionized
 if a majority of the employees supports doing so. However, true collective bargaining
 takes place only in the small private sector of the modern economy, although this
 situation itself suffered setbacks during the year. In the modern sector, the Govern-
 ment is by far the largest employer (civil service and State-owned enterprises) and
 it dominates the bargaining process. However, the Government has adopted a tri-
 
 
 partite (government-employers-labor) cooperative approach to setting wages and re-
 solving labor disputes. Both the Government and employers may refer disputes to
 the IC. The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers, but there
 were no reported incidents of government harassment of union officials. Unioniza-
 tion was blocked effectively by some recently privatized industries, especially in the
 textile and hotel sectors. The Government took only limited action on organized
 labor complaints, pointing out that refusal to allow unionization is a constitutional
 violation.
 There are no exort processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or bonded
 labor, including forced or bonded labor by children, but a lack of resources prevented
 the Government from enforcing this prohibition effectively. However, there is strong
 evidence that prison officials hired out prisoners to work on private farms and con-
 struction sites, where they often were overworked. Throughout the country, prison
 officials routinely augmented their meager pay with crops grown by prisoners on the
 prison grounds. Male prisoners performed arduous physical labor while female pris-
 oners produced marketable handicrafts such as woven basketry.
 Compensation, when paid, was generally very low, although the law demands that
 pretrial detainees must receive back pay or  work that they have performed once
 they are released.
 The LRA abducted numerous children and terrorized them into virtual slavery as
 guards, laborers, soldiers, and sex slaves (see Sections 1.b. and 1.g.). They also re-
 portedly sold and traded some children or provided them as gifts to arms dealers
 in Sudan.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Employ-
 ers are prohibited by law from hiring workers below the age of 18, but child labor
 is common, especially in the informal sector. Children in prison perform manual
 labor, often 12 hours per day (see Section 1.c.). The Ministry of Social Services is
 charged with enforcing the law on child labor, but it has limited financial means
 to do so. Part of the problem is demographic, as half the population is under 18
 years of age. School fees have made it impossible for many parents-particularly
 poor farmers, the majority of the population-to provide their children with an edu-
 cation in spite of the Government's PE program (see Section 5). As a result, there
 is an incentive to leave school and go into agcultal or domestic work in order
 to help meet expenses or perform the work of absent or infirm parents, a common
 situation throughout the country. About 55 percent of school age children are in
 school.
 Most working children are employed in the informal sector, often on the subsist-
 ence farms of extended family members or as domestic servants. In urban areas,
 children peddle small items on the streets, are involved in the commercial sex in-
 dustry (particularly in border towns and in Kampala), or beg for money. Although
 adults do most tea harvesting, some children were employed in this sector as well.
 It is estimated that 60 percent of all land-based trade in the country is informal.
 Smuggling is one of the larger informal industries, and illegally employs large num-
 bers of child laborers at the borders with Kenya and Tanzania. Children walk back
 and forth across the unguarded borders, transporting small amounts of fuel, sugar,
 coffee, or other commodities.
 Government efforts to decrease the incidence of child labor were boosted by a $1.5
 million grant from the ILO International Program for the Elimination of Child
 Labor (IPEC) grant. In November the Government signed a memorandum of under-
 standing with the ILO acceding fully to the IPEC. Government officials acknowl-
 edged that for the IPEC to be implemented, continued judicial and law enforcement
 reform were needed.
 The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, but a lack of resources pre-
 vented the Government from enforcing this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Cabinet has taken no action on a 1997 rec-
 ommendation by the minimum wage board to establish a minimum rate of pay.
 Wages continued to be determined through negotiation between individuals and
 their employers, unions, and proprietors, or through negotiation within the boards
 of directors at state-owned industries. Salaries usually are augmented by other ben-
 efits such as housing and transport allowances, which are often equal to base wages.
 The Ministry of Labor's salary scale for civil servants starts with unskilled labor at
 $50 (51,133 shillings) per month, up to supervisors at $400 (414,738 shillings) per
 month, plus modest increases for years worked. All include provisions for paid over-
 time. The higher end of this wage scale would provide minimal standards of living
 for a worker and family, but most civil servants have great difficulty earning
 enough money to pay their children's school costs. Many civil servants and their de-
 pendents work in second jobs, grow their own food, or seek other ways to feed them-
 
 
 selves. In industries that employ workers on an hourly basis, the normal workweek
 was 40 hours. Although there was no legal maximum workweek, a time-and-a-half
 rate was paid for each additional hour worked. Many industries pay workers by
 piece work, which avoids overtime and circumvents the prohibition on child labor.
 The condition of employee housing on the tea and sugar plantations at the major
 state-owned corporations, and within military and police barracks, was substandard.
 Sanitation and water facilities often are lacking.
 Building codes often are not enforced. Some structures have tripled in height
 above the original foundations, leading local engineers to express reservations about
 the structural integrity of these workplaces. Factories generally are sound, but ma-
 chinery almost always lacks safegards.
 Vestiges of occupational health and safety legislation are contained in the out-
 dated Factories Act of 1954, the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1964, and the Em-
 ployment Decree of 1975. None of these acts addresses present-day working haz-
 ards. The Ministry of Labor's Department of Occupational Health is responsible for
 enforcement of the limited occupational safety regulations, but in practice inspec-
 tions are rare, due primarily to the inspectors' lack of vehicles and funding for in-
 spection trips. Under the law, the maximum award payable in workers' compensa-
 tion to a disabled employee, or to the estate of employees killed on the job is $38
 (40,000 shillings). Ministry of Labor officials recognized the inadequacy of this
 amount, but new legislation to address this problem has yet to be passed. The lim-
 ited occupational safety regulations do not protect workers who refuse to perform
 dangerous work from being fired, although strong unions in certain dangerous in-
 dustries do protect such workers.
