UGANDA
The report on Uganda succeeds in conveying a broadly accurate account of the human rights situation in 1988. However, it is sometimes inaccurate in its details. Such errors or omissions of fact tend generally, though not exclusively, to downplay the scale of human rights abuses.
The report correctly notes that most human rights abuses have taken place in the context of armed conflict in northern and eastern Uganda and that armed rebel groups bear responsibility for many of the incidents reported in 1988. However, the State Department minimizes reported abuses from outside the conflict areas. Such reports, particularly of torture by the intelligence organizations in their Kampala headquarters, represent perhaps the most worrying human rights development in 1988.
The report thus mentions the arrest in October 1988 of six officials of the Internal Security Organization (ISO) after a prisoner died in their custody. However, it ^ves no indication that there have been a number of other credible reports of torture by the ISO. There also have been persistent allegations of arbitrary detention and torture by military intelligence at its headquarters in Basiima House in Kampala.
Similarly, the report mentions the arrest (in December 1987) of Charles Kagenda-Atwooki, a senior officiai of the Uganda People's Congress who was later "charged with possession of anti-government documents." However, it neglects to add that he was not charged imtil March 1988 and that in the meantime he was held incommunicado for four months by military intelligence.
The report correctly states that "there continued to be clear evidence of killing by both the NRA [National Resistance Army] and opposition elements...." However, this contention is weakened by the report's citation of only a single instance of political killing by the NRA, a case in which President Yoweri Museveni himself intervened over the killing of a police officer by soldiers. However, there have been frequent allegations of NRA killings of dvilians
195
Critique
~ more than are suggested by the report's limp statement that "NRA troops have also treated villagers harshly." For example, many unarmed villagers in Gulu District in northern Uganda were reported to have been killed by the NRA during an anti-rebel offensive during the last quarter of1988. It is a serious omission for the report not to mention these allegations.
The Ugandan government, to its credit, promised a joint military-civilian inquiry into NRA killings in Gulu District. However, this inquiry was exceptional; the government has generally been reluctant to investigate allegations of political killings or to bring those responsible to justice. Like the government itself, the report does not distinguish adequately between the fairly strict discipUne imposed on NRA soldiers for freelance offenses against the civilian population and the indulgent attitude toward abuses carried out in the course of military operations. We know of no instance in which an NRA soldier has been charged with killing a dvilian or a prisoner in the course of such operations.
The report presents a generally accurate picture of the detention of political opponents, although at one point it mistakenly describes most detainees as "prisoners taken in the fighting." In fact, the NRA seems to take few prisoners. Most of those detained appear to be villagers from the conflict areas suspected of supporting the rebels. The State Department offers an estimate of 2,000 for the number of "lodgers" -- detainees held under military authority in civilian prisons -- without making clear the time frame to which the estimate refers. There were frequent releases and arrests throughout 1988, which meant that the figures fluctuated greatly. In early 1988, according to official figures, there were more than 4,000 "lodgers." By early 1989, there were 2,900. The report correctly identifies the failure of the authorities to notify the relatives of detainees. In contrast to the 1987 report, it also drav^ attention to the problem of the detention without trial of children from northern and east-em Uganda.
The report incorrectly states that the bill establishing special powers for magistrates' coiuts had already been enacted into law, at this writing, the bill awaits debate by the National Resistance Council, the interim le^ature. The proposed law represents a serious interference vsith the right to a fair trial.
196
Uganda
The report identifies the suspension of rules of evidence, including the presiunption of innocence, as a dangerous threat. It does not mention that if the bill is passed, the president will have the power to appoint anyone he chooses as a magistrate, including members of the army. In areas of insurgency, the power of magistrates' courts will be extended to cases of treason, murder and armed robbery, all of which carry the death penalty. In capital cases, the magistrate ^ sit with two assessors, who will play a similar function to a jury in helping to determine matters of fact. One of the assessors is to be a serving soldier. Since the bill also ^ves the NRA powers of arrest and detention in affected areas, there is a real danger that in many cases the army will play the role of prosecutor, judge and jury. The report pays insufficient attention to the implications of this proposed law, not only for the "areas of insurgen<^ but also for the fair administration of justice in Uganda as a whole. In addition, the authors of the report appear to be unaware that the extension of the powers of magistrates' coiu'ts and the special coiuts proposed by the Army Council to deal with armed banditry are one and the same thing.
In common with most foreign governments, the State Department appears eager to give full credit to President Museveni's government in its efforts to overcome Uganda's long history of serious human r^ts abuses, and it is probably for this reason that the report fails to detail some of the more serious government abuses in 1988. It is, indeed, important that the government's significant institutional changes are supported ~ such as the Inspector-General of Government, who investigates complaints of human rights abuse. However, it does no service to either the government or the Ugandan people to minimi/e the scale of continuing abuses.
197
