 UGANDA
 The overthrow of Idi Amin in mid-1979 by Tanzanian and
 Ugandan exile forces marked the beginning of efforts to
 reestablish political and economic order in Uganda. Amin's
 brutal rule during the period from 1971 to 1979 resulted in
 death or exile for thousands of Ugandans. During these
 years, Uganda's once-prosperous economy steadily declined.
 The 1979 fighting itself resulted in substantial destruction
 of towns, factories, and other infrastructure. Looting was
 widespread and a flood of new displaced persons -- many of
 them former Amin soldiers and policemen or tribesmen from
 Amin's home area of West Nile province -- moved Into neighbor-
 ing Sudan, Zaire and Kenya.
 Law and order broke down almost totally during the Amin
 years and in the chaos of the war that ended the Amin
 period. It was replaced by rule of the guns which have
 been abundantly available to the Ugandan population.
 Violence, both politically and economically motivated,
 continued to be a problem in some areas of Uganda throughout
 1981. Former followers of Idi Amin continued to operate
 against targets of opportunity mainly in West Nile Province.
 Some unsuccessful contenders in the December 1980 election
 chose to oppose the elected government by force. Their
 forces raided Kampala in March. They have since maintained a
 presence around Kampala and continued to make sporadic raids
 in: the Kampala area. These attacks provoke retaliation by
 the security forces. Innocent civilians bear the brunt of
 this conflict.
 Insecurity, inflation, scarcity of foreign exchange, lack of
 new investment, misallocation of resources, corruption and
 poorly chosen economic policies caused a steady decline in
 production and export earnings during Amin's rule. This
 continued at an even more rapid pace in the period of
 interim post-Amin governments leading up to national elec-
 tions in December 1980.
 The election campaign, which resulted in the return to power
 of former President Milton Obote and his Uganda Peoples
 Congress (UPC) party, was termed a "valid electoral exercise"
 by the.British Commonwealth Observer Group invited to Uganda
 by the then-ruling Uganda Military Commission. However,
 there were claims by Ugandans of rigging and intimidation
 during the election process. The December 1980 elections
 were contested by four political parties. Except for the
 UPC, all parties disputed the election results, claim-
 ing voting fraud by the UPC. The Democratic Party (DP) led
 by Paul Ssemogerere, which came in second, decided to take
 its seats in parliament and remains an active opposition
 having 51 out of 126 members of parliament. The other
 parties have rejected the election and some members have
 adopted a policy of armed opposition to the government.
 Principal objectives of the Obote government in its first
 year back in power have been the promotion of economic
 recovery and the improvement of internal security. The
 --government's floating of the shilling in June 1981 resulted
 in-an-effective ten-to-one devaluation and was accompanied
 by the lifting of most-price controls. Prices paid to
 farmers for export crops (mainly coffee) have been increased
 
 (291)
 
 
 292
 substantially and agricultural production in general appears
 to be recovering at a steady pace from the ravages of Amin's
 rule, war and post-war drought. Recruitment and training
 efforts are continuing as the Obote government seeks to
 strengthen the numbers and discipline of its police and
 armed forces. By mid-1981, the presence of Tanzanian security
 forces in Uganda had been sharply reduced and the major
 burden for maintaining internal order was assumed by Uganda's
 own newly-recruited police and army. Although there has been
 a substantial and steady improvement in the security situation
 in Uganda compared with the period of interim governments
 prior to the 1980 election, security problems abound and
 remain the most serious obstacle in the path of Uganda's
 recovery. Government control in West Nile province was
 shaky throughout the year. In August, guerrillas operating
 there sought refuge at the Ombachi mission. Government
 troops sent to deal with the guerrillas overreacted and killed
 several dozen civilians at the mission. This was the worst
 reported incident of senseless violence. Religious leaders
 in Uganda had jointly appealed to President Obote in October
 of 1981 for further action to halt the violence -- especially
 in the Kampala area and often involving Uganda's security
 forces -- which had resulted in numerous killings, rapes and
 lootings. Corruption continues to be fairly widespread.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Brutal interrogation and beatings are reported to occur at
 army prisons, barracks and security service locations. Such
 alleged actions are, however, contrary to Ugandan laws.
 Amnesty International has received reports of detainees being
 tortured. It has not been possible to verify these reports.
 Members of the Ugandan army were arrested in the fall of 1981
 in connection with the murders of several Kenyan truckers
 from whom these army personnel were attempting to extort
 funds. Also, the government has announced that more than
 1,000 military personnel have been arrested for unspecified
 crimes.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Prison conditions in Uganda are crowded and poor. These
 conditions generally are a product of Uganda's current
 paucity of resources and inefficient administration. The
 situation is made worse by the frequent refusal of concerned
 officials to permit family visits and family supply of food
 or medicine to prisoners held for political or security
 reasons. However, the government has released large numbers
 of prisoners arrested in the immediate aftermath of the fall
 of the Amin regime; nearly 2,500 former soldiers or policemen
 have been released from prison in the past year.
 c.   Disappearances
 Disappearances have continued to be a problem in the post-Amin
 period. Arrests are often made without explanation and dead
 bodies have been discovered on occasion at various remote
 
 
 293
 places around Kampala. Government involvement in such inci-
 dents has been alleged, though not proven, and the Ugandan
 government has vigorously denied any government involvement.
 Such occurrences have been happening.with decreasing frequency
 however, in the post-election period. There is no reliable
 estimate of the numbers of victims involved. The disappear-
 ances appear to be acts of indiscipline committed by both
 government-officials and opposition leaders.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 A detention law permits arrests without charges or trial
 when specified procedural requirements are met certify-
 ing. that. detention is in the public interest. As many as
 100 such arrests-may have been made in the post-election
 period.   Even more frequently, individuals are imprisoned
 -without resort to the detention procedures. It is possible
 that several hundred people have been arrested for "self-
 custody" or "self-protection" without any legal basis during
 the same post-election period. In its 1981 report, Amnesty
 International indicated it has investigated and issued
 appeals on behalf of both detainees and victims of apparent
 -excesses by the security forces. The government has been
 sensitive to international criticism of its human rights
 practices, and has beencareful to ensure detainees are
 charged under articles of the criminal code. At the end of
 the year, the'six opposition members of parliament who had
 been under detention were amnestied. Occasionally efforts
 to exercise habeas corpus rights under Ugandan law are
 frustrated by refusals of police or prison officials to ac-
 cept service or to produce prisoners as ordered by Uganda's
 courts.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 ,Uganda's judicial system is capable of-functioning quite
 well considering the backlog of cases it has to deal with.
 Trials are open to the public-and the judiciary enjoys a
 reputation for independence from government pressures.
 .However, despite constitutional guarantees of a public
 trial, many detainees have not been brought to trial because
 of the large backlog.of cases and limited police resources.
 These procedures do not apply in detention law cases,
 and as previously indicated, habeas corpus actions are
 occasionally frustrated.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Army personnel are frequent violators of Uganda's legal
 protection against warrantless searches of homes. The result
 has been that whole villages or neighborhoods frequently
 flee from their homes upon the approach of military units
 searching for guerrillas or simply out to obtain goods which
 they can commandeer by force of arms. The government argues
 that such sweeps are only initiated after guerrilla attacks
 in those localities.
 2. :Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Preedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Chapter 3 of.Uganda's constitution guarantees freedom of
 speech, press, religion and assembly. Uganda has a relatively
 
 
 294
 free press, which was particularly evident during the December
 1980 elections. Since then, the government has shut down
 several newspapers and has occasionally expelled foreign
 journalists. The Democratic Party's newspaper, closed under
 one name but permitted to reopen under another, has been
 outspoken in blaming government security forces for continuing
 internal violence, calling for a return to a constitutional
 rule of law and generally attributing responsibility for the
 country's deepseated economic problems to the Obote government
 Democratic Party members of parliament have been able to
 engage UPC members in free and open debate of these same
 issues on national television and radio. Kenyan newspapers
 are readily available in Uganda but other publications includ-
 ing books are in very short supply because of foreign exchange
 constraints. There have been reports of actions by government
 security officials and UPC party leaders at local levels to
 prevent rallies by the opposition. Trade unions are closely
 associated with the government and, with most industries
 closed or working far below capacity, they have relatively
 little independent power. Professional organizations such as
 the Law Society have continued to operate and to work for
 advancement of their professional interests. University
 appointments can be influenced by political factors but there
 is little direct interference with curricula.
 Freedom of religious practice is well preserved. Although
 members of the clergy suffer from the same acts of banditry
 or indiscipline as do other Ugandans, there is no indication
 that they are targeted for religious reasons or that the
 government is seeking to hinder or advance the activities of
 any single religious sect.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Repatriation and Emigration
 Roadblocks at scattered locations in urban centers and on
 main roads around the country are manned by police or the
 army for the intended purpose of halting crime and prevent-
 ing the infiltration of guerrilla forces loyal to opposition
 groups in exile. In practice, the roadblocks often have
 been used by those who man them to steal money and goods
 from passers-by. The effect is to impede transport of both
 goods and people within the country. Foreign travel is
 restricted mainly by a dearth of foreign exchange. Some
 Ugandans continue to emigrate, while others have been
 returning to Uganda.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There was active multi-party participation in Uganda's 1980
 elections, and the Democratic Party has continued to play an
 important role in its opposition position in parliament.
 Voting and other political rights are guaranteed in Uganda's
 constitution. Although there is no legal bar to active
 participation by women in Uganda's political parties, they
 have tended for practical or cultural reasons to be less
 involved than men in Uganda's political affairs. However, a
 appointed deputy secretary general of the UPC.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Interna-
 tional and Non-Government Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The government has permitted regular visits by the
 International Committee of the Red Cross to civilian prisons
 (other than police stations) to inspect conditions and
 
 
 treatment accorded to detainees suspected of being supporters of
 Idi Amin or soldiers in his army, and it has expressed its
 intention to continue this policy. However, no visits have
 taken place since mid-December 1981.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Uganda is one of the world's poorest countries. In 1979,
 the per capita income was estimated to be $290. Nearly
 40 percent of the urban and 70 percent of the rural popula-
 tion do not earn enough to purchase essential goods and
 services, with its changes in economic policies (devaluation
 and lifting of price controls) to emphasize greater reliance
 on market forces and with assistance from the World Bank,
 International Monetary Pund and Western bilateral donor
 countries including the United States, Uganda's economy is
 showing signs of slowly moving towards recovery and resumed
 economic growth. Agricultural production (and coffee exports)
 have made encouraging gains. Imported consumer goods are
 becoming available in stores though at high prices reflecting
 both scarcity and the devaluation of the shilling.
 The private sector provides moat of the country's food and
 with adequate resources could also make a significant contri-
 bution to economic recovery in the industrial, transport
 and service sectors. Although the government has increased
 public sector salaries, wages remain far below the minimum
 needed to enable public servants to live on government
 salaries and to recapture the earlier high standard of
 public service which obtained in Uganda.
 Government attempts to implement programs of reconstruction,
 education, health care, housing and other public services
 are hampered by shortages of resources, waste and corruption
 which cannot be overcome either easily or quickly. Average
 life expectancy in Uganda is about 52 years according to the
 latest available data. During the 1970's, the population
 grew at an average rate of 3 percent per year. Roughly
 60 percent of males and 40 percent of females attend primary
 school. Lack of government resources constrains efforts to
 expand the educational system.
 Under Ugandan law, women enjoy equal rights with men. By
 custom and religious practice, they are frequently con-
 strained from exercising their rights as fully as do men.
 As an example, it is not accepted custom for women to ride
 bicycles in many parts of Uganda. On the other hand, women
 drive cars without any similar conflict. Women, like men,
 have benefited from Uganda's exceptional structure of public
 and private education--though there are fewer places for
 girls than for boys at higher levels of education. Women
 are active in business both at the private enterprise
 retail level and in most public and private corporations.
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 20
 
 
 296
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND 6RANTS- ObLIW#TIUNS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UGANDA
 1979     1980     1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         3.0      6.1       9.0
 LOANSe. .............     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ................    3.0       6.1      9.0
 A.AIO .......... ....    .....  3.0     0.0      2.0
 LOANS.................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ...   .....  ...     3.0      0.0      2.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASS1ST.). *         3.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      6.1       7.0
 LOANS..............     ... 0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS................     0.0       6.1      7.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0-      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      C.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0       6.1      7.0
 E.RELIEI'.EC.DEV & WFP.        6.0       1.4      2.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....          0.0      4.7       4.7
 C.OTHER ECON.. ASSIST...        0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............     ... 0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS......    .......    0.0      0.0       0.0
 PEACE CORPS               0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.M1L. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............       0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS...............       .0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREODT SALES-FS....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         3.0      6.1      9.0
 LOANS.... ............   0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............. .     3.0      6.1       9.0
 *OTHER US LOANS.. ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         0.0      0.0       0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980     1981    .1946-81
 TOTAL........      3.7     Q2.5     38.7    235.8
 ;BRD               0.0      0.0     .0.0       .4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       3.2
 IDA                0.0     72.5     17.0     132.0
 10B                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AFOB               0.0      9.7      0.0     27.2
 UNOP               3.7      7.3      14.0    46.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0'     3.0      7.7      16.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
