Uganda
The war in northern Uganda, which started when President Yoweri
Museveni and the National Resistance Movement/Army took power
eighteen years ago in 1986, continued in 2004. Violence and related
human rights abuses abated somewhat by mid-year yet predictions of an
imminent military solution to the conflict proved unfounded. The war
pits the northern Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) against the government’s
Ugandan Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) and the people of
the three northern districts where the Acholi live – and the war has
expanded to parts of eastern Uganda in 2003-04. In February, the LRA
committed the worst massacre of the entire conflict in an eastern district
by attacking Barlonyo internally displaced person’s camp, defended
only by a small local defence unit, and killing more than 330 people.
The LRA continues in its practice of abducting children, who remain
the main victims of this war. President Museveni did, however, take an
unprecedented step in referring the case of Uganda’s LRA to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in December 2003. The ICC
agreed to undertake an investigation but peace activists in Uganda
remain wary that Museveni will manipulate this international institution
to punish his foes, and thereby diminish chances for a negotiated settlement,
while avoiding investigation of the Ugandan army’s abuses.
Ugandan security agencies have proliferated and are implicated in torture
and illegal detention of suspected rebels and their sympathizers.
The Ugandan government continued to support armed groups in the
conflict in the Ituri region of the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), despite officially withdrawing from eastern DRC in accordance
with the Luanda accords signed in September 2002.
The War in Northern Uganda
The LRA persisted in its policy of abducting northern Ugandan children
to use as soldiers and forced sexual partners for its forces in 2004. 
This has brought the number of abducted children to a new high. More
than 20,000 children have been seized by the LRA over the course of
the war. In total, more than 1,300,000 civilians are currently forced to
live in government-controlled displaced camps.
In 2004, the LRA continued with renewed severity its attacks on civilians
living in displaced persons and Sudanese refugee camps and others
it considered to be collaborating with the UPDF. An LRA raid on
Barlonyo camp near Lira in eastern Uganda resulted in up to 337
deaths. This attack was followed by a protest demonstration of more
than 10,000 people, angry at the lack of government protection in the
camps. Many questioned the willingness and effectiveness of the UPDF
to protect civilians against the LRA, claiming that it is often absent or
too late to respond when the LRA strikes. President Museveni, in a rare
move, apologized for UPDF’s failure to stop the massacre. The LRA
continued in its offensive through the year, killing civilians, abducting
children, destroying and looting property and taking captives to porter
the loot in a number of other raids on internally displaced persons
camps. Cases of LRA mutilation of suspected spies, including cutting
off lips and limbs, were reported.
The UPDF has also committed abuses in the north, including arbitrary
detention, torture, rape, and stealing. A few civilians have pending civil
actions for damages on account of this ill treatment; the UPDF soldiers
are rarely criminally prosecuted for abuse of civilians. Furthermore, the
failure to protect civilians in the north has been persistent. The Human
Rights Committee, a body that monitors state compliance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, noted in its concluding
observations on Uganda the failure of the state “to ensure the
right to liberty and security of persons affected by the armed conflict in
northern Uganda.”
President Museveni referred the war in northern Uganda, particularly
the LRA’s role in it, to the ICC in December 2003. This was the first time a state has made such a referral. The ICC prosecutor, Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, since launched an investigation but it is not clear that
the serious crimes committed by the government will also be investigated.
The Conflict in DRC
Despite the official withdrawal in May 2003 of Ugandan troops,
Uganda continues to provide support to armed groups in Eastern DRC,
particularly in the Ituri region, which they partially occupied from 1998
to 2003, and where the UPDF committed war crimes and other violations
of international humanitarian law. Continued support for proxies
in DRC has been in part to ensure allies in Uganda’s strategic border
region, but also to ensure continued control over the lucrative trade in
natural resources from the DRC, particularly gold. A report in mid
2004 by a U.N. arms monitoring panel documented Ugandan complicity
in arms trading across the border, and Ugandan forces intervened on
at least one occassion to ensure their allies in Ituri remained in control.
In August and September 2004 local sources reported further assistance
by Ugandan troops to General Jèrôme Kakwavu, leader of an Ituri
based armed group responsible for the torture and killing of civilians. In
a move to deflect Uganda’s role in supporting such groups, President
Museveni wrote secretly in August 2004 to the U.N. Secretary General
requesting provisional immunity from prosecution for armed group
leaders operating in Ituri, and the suspension of investigations by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in DRC but not in Uganda.
Torture and Other Abuses by Ugandan Security Forces
Ugandan security and intelligence agencies have used torture to coerce
detainees to provide information or confess, detaining suspects in illegal
places of detention called “safe houses,” and holding them for weeks or
months without ever charging them with any crime. Methods of torture
include suspending suspects tied “kandoya” (tying hands and feet behind the victim) from the ceiling, severe beating and kicking, and
attaching electric wires to the male genitals.
Among the agencies accused of torture are the UPDF’s Chieftancy of
Military Intelligence (CMI), the Internal Security Organization (ISO),
the Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU) and ad hoc agencies such as the
Joint Anti-Terrorist Task Force (JATF.) In October the Uganda Human
Rights Commission (UHRC) found that torture continued to be a
widespread practice amongst security organizations in Uganda, being
commonly used to humiliate and breakdown suspects in investigation.
The torture and illegal detentions in safe houses seem related to military
intelligence and security force suspicions that the detainees, who
are often involved in political opposition activities, are linked to armed
rebel movements. Many previously or currently politically active suspects
are charged with terrorism or treason, both of which carry the
death penalty. By constitutional provision detainees in such cases may
be held for up to 360 days without being charged with any crime
although they must be held in legal places of detention.
Political Freedom
The present political system restricts prospective candidates to standing
on an all-inclusive “movement” platform. The movement system is
based on the idea of one supposedly all-inclusive “movement” in which
individual candidates run for elections based on their personal merit.
The system was introduced in 1986 by the victorious rebel forces led by
current President Museveni. In practice, this “no-party” system has significantly
curtailed civil and political rights of those who are in political
opposition. A legal challenge to the legitimacy of the movement system
in Uganda was successful at the Constitutional Court in June. The
court ruled that a 2000 referendum which had confirmed one-party rule
was null and void. However, following an angry outburst from President
Museveni on the decision was subsequently overturned by the Supreme Court in September. Presently the Constitution specifically requires
Parliament to amend the constitution to allow the President to serve
more than two terms in office, but the authorities plan a referendum on
the issue – possibly to be combined with a referendum on whether a
multi-party political system should be reinstituted. The referendum is
planned for February 2005.
Press Freedom
The temporary closure by army and police of the independent Monitor
newspaper in late 2002 has had a chilling effect on that newspaper and
on free speech generally. Journalists from the paper continued to come
under attack in 2004, two of whom were publicly denounced as “rebel
collaborators” by the spokesman for the UPDF.
However, in February the Supreme Court enhanced freedom of expression
in Uganda by repealing a frequently invoked law allowing reporters
to be prosecuted for reporting subversive “false news” in a ruling in
favour of the Monitor newspaper. Following this the Chief Magistrates
Court in Kampala in April ruled in favour of The Monitor in another
case brought by the government who alleged the newspaper had endangered
national security by reporting on the war in the north.
HIV/AIDS
Uganda continues to face a generalized epidemic of HIV/AIDS despite
being widely acknowledged as a regional success story in combating the
epidemic. In 2004, senior government officials, including President
Museveni, made numerous comments undermining the effectiveness of
condoms as a strategy to prevent sexual HIV transmission. These comments
were apparently linked to the prospect of significant foreign aid
from the United States for programs that emphasize “abstinence only”
as an HIV prevention strategy. Abstinence only programs have been
shown to censor critical and lifesaving information about condoms and HIV prevention, in violation of the human right to information and the
highest attainable standard of health.
Key International Actors
The humanitarian situation in northern Uganda remained dire in 2004,
with 80 percent of the entire northern population in displaced persons’
camps. Security remains very poor for relief agencies as well as for the
population itself, and in several areas the UPDF refuses to escort relief
convoys to camps on account of danger.
A group of international donors meets regularly with the Ugandan government
and negotiates budget items, including defense spending, with
it. These donors provide one-half of the budget of the Ugandan government,
their funds going directly to the treasury once the budget has
been agreed.
The U.S. government is not part of this donors’ group, and has provided
military assistance and training to the UPDF to enable it to protect
civilians in northern Uganda as well as become an effective counterinsurgency
force—an approach the donor’s group does not endorse. No
special human rights conditions are attached to this U.S. military assistance.
This aid has facilitated the pursuit of a purely military solution to
the conflict in the north, an approach Museveni has long endorsed that
has been widely criticized by civil society in the north.