 UGANDA
 During the first 6 months of the year, President Yoweri Musveni continued to
 rule through the National Resistance Movement (NRM), as he had since 1986. The
 President dominated the Government, the NRM, and t    ransition process to con-
 stitutional government. The October 1995 Constitution provided for a 276-member
 unicameral Parliament and an autonomous, independently elected President. The
 Constitution formally extended Uganda's one-party "movement" form of government
 for 5 years and severely restricted political party activities, with a national referen-
 dum on the role of multiple political parties scheduled for the year 2000. In June
 and July, separate generally peaceful and orderly presidential and parliamentary
 elections were held; Museveni was elected President by a wide margin, and NRM
 supporters won an overwhelming majority of seats in the new Parliament. However,
 provisions of the election laws heavily favored the NRM, and restrictions on political
 party activities, NRM use of state institutions, inaccuracy in the voters register, and
 a proliferation of fraudulent voter cards led to a flawed election process. Technical
 aspects of the election were generally carried out in a transparent manner. The judi-
 ciary is generally independent, but weak; the President has extensive legal and ex-
 tralegal powers.
 The rganda People's Defense Force (UPDF) is the key security force. The new
 Constitution maintains civilian control of the UPDF, with the President designated
 as commander-in-chief. The UPDF's demobilization program, which concluded in
 1995, was partially reversed due to increasing instability in the north, and some sol-
 diers were reactivated to combat the rebels. Efforts against northern insurgents
 
 
 were placed under the command of President Museveni's brother, Major General
 Salim Saleh. UPDF soldiers and members of local defense units (LDU's) assist the
 police in rural areas, although the LDU's continued to operate without a legal man-
 date. The Internal Security Organization (ISO) remained under the direct authority
 of the President. Although primarily an intelligence gathering body, ISO operatives
 occasionally detained civilians. The ISO's record showed improvement over previous
 years, although the UPDF, police, and LDU'S committed human rights abuses.
 Primarily based on agriculture, the economy grew 8.5 percent during the fiscal
 year that ended June 30. Coffee remained the chief export crop and foreign ex-
 change earner. In addition, the value of cotton exports jumped by 50 percent, while
 production of sugar, milk, poultry, and fisheries saw more modest increase. As the
 privatization of state-owned companies continued, companies ranging from soft
 drinks to cement received large infusions of private-sector capital. To fight rural
 poverty (annual gross domestic product was estimated at $220 per capita), the Gov-
 ernment continued its infrastructure modernization programs and relied heavily on
 foreign aid to support its development program. Foreign assistance accounted for ap-
 proximately 51 percent of government spending.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat, but numerous, seri-
 ous problems remain. Citizens have the right to change their government, but NRM
 domination of the flawed election process limited this right. Security forces used ex-
 cessive force, at times resulting in death. Government forces committed or failed to
 prevent some extrajudicial killings of suspected rebels and civilians. Police, UPDF,
 and LDU forces regularly beat and sometimes tortured suspects, often to force con-
 fessions. Despite measures to improve the discipline and training of security forces,
 and despite the punishment of some security force officials guilty of abuses, security
 force abuses remained a problem throughout the country.
 Prison conditions remained harsh. Prolonged pretrial detention remained a prob-
 lem. Poor judicial administration, lack of resources, a large case backlog, and
 lengthy trial delays circumscribed due process and the right to a fair trial. The
 UPDF at times infringed on citizens' privacy rights. The Government at times re-
 stricted freedom of the press. Although independent newspapers generally published
 freely, the Government dominated the media, limited freedom ofspeech during the
 election campaigns, occasionally used outdated sedition laws, and imprisoned some
 members of the media. This led some journalists to practice self-censorship. In July
 the UPDF began censoring press reports about the northern insurgencies. The Gov-
 ernment has required many students to take NRM political education courses; how-
 ever, this program was suspended for much of the year. The new Constitution ex-
 tended previously existing restrictions on political activity for an additional 5 years,
 effectively limiting freedom of assembly and association. Discrimination against
 women, domestic violence, and the rape of women and children remained serious
 problems. Child labor is widespread.
 Insurgent forces committed numerous serious abuses. The Lord's Resistance Army
 (LRA), led by Joseph Kony, continued to kill, torture, maim, rape, and abduct large
 numbers of civilians. The West Nile Bank Front (WNBF) also committed killings.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings by government forces. However, in the course of official oper-
 ations, police, UPDF, and LDU personnel sometimes used excessive force, resulting
 in deaths. In one incident, an LDU guard killed an unarmed civilian to protect an
 accused thief from a mob. In another incident, an LDU guard killed 11 persons by
 rolling a grenade into a dance hall after he saw another man with his girlfriend.
 The guard and a dozen of his LDU companions were arrested following the incident.
 In Mbale district, the army began disarming the LD1Ys to counter such offenses. In
 the northern town of Gulu in August, UPDF personnel stood aside while a mob beat
 to death four prisoners believed to be members of the LRA. In another incident in
 April, UPDF soldiers reportedly killed an unarmed LDU guard in the Gulu area
 while he was in the process of surrendering to arrest. In June two persons residing
 in the Gulu town barracks were shot to death under suspicious circumstances. In
 November a police officer in Kampala opened fire on a crowd that was restraining
 police from stripping naked a suspected thief (a common mode of informal justice);
 one person was killed and four seriously wounded. No government action in re-
 sponse to these incidents was reported. Poor conditions and lack of adequate medi-
 cal treatment caused many deaths in prisons (see Section 1.c.).
 
 
 At year's end, the case of the policeman arrested in June 1995 for killing a striker
 at the Lugazi Sugar Corporation was still pending. Vigilante justice was a problem
 (see Section 1.c.).
 The LRA was responsible for the killing of numerous civilians (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 at the hands of government forces.
 On August 4, the LRA abducted Alfred Ocen Lalur, the chief administrative offi-
 cer of Lira. His whereabouts remain unknown (see also Section 1.g.). In addition,
 the LEA abducted dozens of shool-age children, reportedly for indoctrination in
 Sudan as LRA guerrillas, for sale as alaves, or for sexual purposes. While some of
 those abducted later escaped or were recaptured, the whereabouts of many children
 remained unresolved at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits "any form of torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading pun-
 ishment." Police and UPDF commonly beat and sometimes tortured suspected crimi-
 nals, often to force confessions. In one instance, three police officers were disarmed
 and beaten by a group of disgruntled citizens. Reinforcements returned shortly
 thereafter to arrest 70 perpetrators, who were in turn beaten by the police.
 LDU's, which frequently lack training, are guilty more often than police of mis-
 treatment of prisoners and detainees. Although they have no authority to make ar-
 rests, LDU~s continued to do so in rural areas. The Government investigated some
 cases of abuse, trying and unishing some offenders. One LDU guard was arrested
 in January after he allegedly shot a person in his custody.
 There were scattered instances in which mobs attacked suspected thieves and
 other offenders caught in the commission of crimes. These mobs engaged in stoning,
 beatings, and other forms of mistreatment, such as tying the suspect's wrists and
 ankles together behind his back, or forcing accused criminals to hop painfully on the
 sides of their ankles. The authorities rarely prosecuted persons engaged in mob jus-
 tice. On occasion mob violence resulted in death.
 Prison conditions remained harsh. There are two civilian prison systems: One
 State-funded and run by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and a second run at the
 local administration level, under the auspices of the Ministry of Local Government.
 Conditions are particularly harsh in the 133 local prisons, which received no central
 government funding. Additionally, although the law states that civilians are never
 to be held in military barracks, civilians continued to be detained in barracks for
 years, often without trial. Both civilian and military prisons have high mortality
 rates from overcrowding, diseases spread by unsanitary conditions, malnutrition,
 and AIDS, a disease that is widespread among the general population. No accurate
 estimates are available on the number of deaths due to poor conditions and lack of
 medical care. According to reports by nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), how-
 ever, at least three persons died in early 1996 at Kangulumira prison in eastern
 Uganda from a combination of poor food, hard labor, and beatings. The predominant
 cause of death among prisoners, however, was AIDS. In the local prisons, the uni-
 forms and bedding stipulated by law are rarely provided, although there is evidence
 that wardens do attempt to obtain these items. In large part, harsh conditions re-
 sult from inadequate funding. The centrally funded prisons are sufficiently orga-
 nized to grow maize, millet, cassava, beans, eggplant, carrots, and other crops. Pris-
 on conditions come closest to international norms in Kampala, where prisons pro-
 vide medical care, running water, and sanitation. On the other hand, these centrally
 funded prisons are the most overcrowded. Luzira upper (maximum security) prison
 regularly holds twice its maximum planned capacity. In June the chief magistrate
 ordered all judges to visit a prison, so that they would understand the reality of
 prison life before passing sentences. Human rights groups, especially the Uganda
 Law Reform Commission, continued to lobby for expanded noncustodial sentencing.
 Although the law provides for access to prisoners by families, ignorance of this right,
 and fear of prison authorities, often limit family visits.
 At the local level, due to a lack of space, juveniles are often kept in prison with
 adults. The central prison system maintains one juvenile prison and two lower secu-
 rity reformatory halls. School facilities and health clinics in all three institutions are
 defunct; prisoners as young as age 12 perform manual labor from dawn until dusk.
 Women have segregated wings in the prisons, with female staff. According to human
 rights advocates, rape is not generally a problem. The central prison system has
 launched a 3-year program to improve prison buildings, water and sanitation sys-
 tems, food, and uniforms. Most of these items are made within the prison system
 itself.
 In September the Government co-hosted an international conference on prison
 conditions throughout Africa. The conference produced a declaration on amelioration
 of prison conditions that is being used by the Government as a guide for its program
 
 
 299
 of prison improvement. As part of this effort, the Government is revising the Prisons
 Act, which provides the legal basis for prison management. In addition, the Govern-
 ment initiated a plan to integrate local prisons with the central prison system.
 Media access to prisons remained limited, but the Government permitted full ac-
 cess to prisons by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and local
 NGO's, principa y the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative (FHRI) and the
 Uganda Prisoners Aid Foundation (UPAF). Prison authorities require advance noti-
 fication of visits, a process that is often subject to administrative delays.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-According to the 1995 Constitution, a
 suspect must be charged within 48 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or re-
 leased on bail within 120 days (360 days for a capital offense). In practice however,
 the authorities enforced neither requirement. Other laws, such as the Public Order
 and Security Act of 1967 (the Detention Order), provide for unlimited detention
 without charge, but these laws have never been formally invoked by the NRM Gov-
 ernment. Legal and human rights groups sharply criticized the excessive length of
 detention without trial-in many cases amounting to several years-for alleged of-
 fenses under other laws.
 Pretrial detainees comprise nearly three-fourths of the prison population. At
 year's end, there were 11,527 prisoners in the central prison system, of whom 4,126
 had been convicted and 7,401 were in pretrial detention (remand). Congestion and
 delay in the legal system have produced similar figures for several years. At the
 locallevel, the situation is far worse. Most of the approximately 4,000 local pris-
 oners have not yet had a fair trial. Civilians detained in military barracks are al-
 most invariably deprived of a fair, civilian trial. The actual numbers of such detain-
 ees are unknown, but there are believed to be fewer than in local prisons. Across
 all types of prisons, the average time in pretrial detention is from 2 to 3 years.
 Some incidents of apparently politically motivated arrests were reported, although
 the number of political detainees is believed to be small. In one case, some 18 Mus-
 lim men were reportedly detained in the Kampala area in February by military in-
 telligence officers and confined in a military barracks without charge.
 Arbitrary arrest is rare. However, in May a prominent member of the political op-
 position and a journalist were arrested during the presidential campaign and
 charged with sedition (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government did not use exile as a means of political control. A presidential
 amnesty for former LRAIWNBF rebels remains in effect, although those who return
 risk capture by mobs or the UPDF, either of which may subject them to violent ret-
 ribution.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary. However, while the judiciary is generally independent, the President has ex-
 tensive legal and extralegal powers that may influence the exercise of this independ-
 ence. He nominates, for the approval of Parliament, members of the Judicial Service
 Commission, which makes recommendations on High Court and Supreme Court ap-
 pointments. The President's influence has also been felt in the Industrial Court (IC)
 (see Section 6.a.). The highest court is the Supreme Court, followed by (in descend-
 ing order) the Court of Appeal/Constitutional Court, the High Court, the chief mag-
 istrate's court, local council (LC) 3 (subcounty), LC 2 (parish), and LC 1 (village).
 A minimum of six justices may sit on the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeall
 Constitutional Court. Although once considered a useful innovation, the LC courts
 are now often thought to be sources of injustice due to such factors as bribery and
 male dominance in rural areas. In addition, there are a few specialized courts to
 deal with industrial or other matters. The IC for arbitration of labor disputes is
 structurally parallel to the chief magistrate's court.
 At the lower end of the judicial system, the local village councils 1) have the au-
 thority to settle civil disputes, including land ownership and payment of debts.
 These courts, often the only ones available to villagers, frequently exceed their au-
 thority by hearing criminal cases, including murder and rape. LC decisions may be
 appealed to magistrate's courts, but often there are no records made of the case at
 the village level, and many defendants are not aware of their right to appeal. The
 civilian judicial system contains procedural safeguards, including the granting of
 bail and appeals to higher courts.
 The right to a fair trial has been circumscribed for many years by an inadequate
 system of judicial administration and resources, resulting n a serious backlog of
 cases. Criminal cases may take 2 years or more to reach the courts. Although the
 case backlog remains huge, some courts began to adhere to the constitutionally pre-
 scribed limits on pretrial detention. The Buganda Road Court continued to dismiss
 cases after 6 months if prosecutors could not produce sufficient evidence to com-
 mence a trial. The Mbale court dismissed four persons accused of plotting to assas-
 sinate the Speaker of Parliament because their pretrial detention exceeded the legal
 
 
 300
 limit by a day. Chief magistrate Lawrence Gidudu ordered all chief magistrates and
 magistrates grade 1 to cease granting adournments if the prosecution does not
 present convincing reasons for the delay. In August a Kampala court ordered the
 release of a Kenyan, arrested for illegally entering the country, who had been de-
 tained in Lubiri barracks for 4 months.
 Many defendants cannot afford legal representation. The Constitution requires
 that the Government provide an attorney for indigent defendants accused of capital
 offenses, but there is rarely enough money to retain adequate counsel. The Uganda
 Law Society (ULS) operates legal aid clinics in four regional offices. It assists mili-
 tary defendants as well as civilians. The Uganda Association of Women Lawyers
 (FIDA) and the FHRI also practice public-interest law from offices in Kampala.
 The military court system does not assure the right to a fair trial. Although the
 accused has the right to legal counsel, military defense attorneys are often un-
 trained and may be assigned by the military command, which also appoints the
 prosecutor and the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military court,
 which may invoke the death penalty, may be appealed to the high command, but
 not to the High or Supreme Courts. The ULS in 1995 petitioned the Government
 to address the lack of an appeals process in the military courts but as of the year's
 end it had received no response, and the issue appeared to be in abeyance. The Gov-
 ernment continued to arrest and charge persons for treason. In the past, numerous
 human rights abuses were committed in connection with treason cases, including
 political detentions, detentions without charge, and mistreatment of prisoners. Such
 abuses reportedly occurred at times in 1996, such as the confinement for 2 weeks
 in a military barracks of some 25 persons detained on suspicion of treason in south-
 western Uganda in September. During the year, the Government charged at least
 84 people with treason and related crimes, in addition to at least 100 pending cases
 in various stages of the legal process. Most were cases in which persons were ac-
 cused of attempting to overthrow the Government. At least 63 people arrested in
 1995 on treason charges for attempting to establish a rebel training camp in
 Buseruka remain in custody, and their case has moved to the high court. Six sus-
 pected LRA rebels remain in custody, and their case has gone to the high court as
 well, as have the cases of businessman Joseph Lusse and two UPDF soldiers ar-
 rested for treason in July 1995. Francis Kilama, charged with treason in July 1995,
 remains in pretrial detention pending police investigation. In November retired
 UPDF soldier Eddy Waswa, who had been charged with treason in October, died
 in Luzira prison, reportedly of natural causes. Several persons previously charged
 with treason, including businessman Salim Okula, were released after dismissal of
 the charges in some instances for procedural reasons.
 The numer of political prisoners is unknown. The case of Bright Gabula Africa,
 whose death sentence for treason was upheld by the Supreme Court in May 1995,
 remains pending. According to the authorities, no executions for treason occurred
 during the year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the protection of privacy, which the Government generally
 observes. The law requires that police have search warrants before entering private
 homes or offices, and the police generally observed this law in practice, although in
 its effort to combat the rebel movement in the north, the UPDF on occasion invaded
 private homes without warrants. UPDF forces in the north also allegedly beat civil-
 ians and confiscated civilian property, such as cattle. The police sometimes searched
 vehicles without prior warrants. Prison officials routinely censor the mail of pris-
 oners.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Reports of violations of humanitarian law increased over previous years. In
 August the UPDF herded 10,000 unarmed residents of the Gulu area into a stadium
 and interrogated them to identify rebel collaborators. They dubbed the exercise "Op-
 eration Panda Gari" (Kiswahili for "get in the truck"). All but 18 were released with-
 in days.
 In the north, forces of the LRA led by Joseph Kony regularly attacked civilian and
 military targets including Sudanese refugee camps, causing widespread death and
 destruction of homes and property. The LRA continued to kill, maim, rape, and
 abduct large numbers of civilians. Newspapers reported that Kony offered bounties
 for the killing of prominent Ugandan military personnel, including the Minister of
 State for Defense. In one incident, approximately 20 civilians were killed near Gulu
 at the end of July. Their mutilated bodies were displayed along the main road. LRA
 soldiers reportedly committed this atrocity to intimidate local citizens. Such
 extrajudicial killings occurred frequently. The LRA massacred 108 unarmed civilian
 Sudanese refugees in an attack on the Achol-Pii refugee camp in July. Rebel forces
 terrorized civilians with tactics that included cutting off noses and ears and break-
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 ing legs with hammers. The LRA regularly abducted children of both sexes for im-
 pressment into its own ranks. The young abductees were taken to clandestine bases,
 where they were virtually enslaved as concubines, guards, and soldiers. LRA forces
 also engaged in the destruction of property, often setting ambushes for military and
 civilian vehicles. In the north, civilians were routinely abducted by the LRA. The
 New Vision newspaper reported that the LRA had abducted more than 1,200 people
 by the end of August, roughly half of whom were later freed. IRA rebels also plant-
 ed land mines on roads in Gulu and Kitgum district throughout the year. Land
 mines on the few roads to the border hinder the transport of food to more than
 200,000 Sudanese refugees in camps near the border.
 In the northwestern region bordering Sudan and Zaire, the WNBF similarly laid
 land mines on major roads used for relief shipments to refugee camps as well as
 for local commerce. In September WNBF forces also reportedly attacked trucks
 transporting refugees, killing 14 persons.
 Another rebel   up, the  lied Democratic Forces (ADF) invaded the Kasese re-
 gion from Zaire in November. Before being driven out by the UPDF, the ADF ab-
 ducted hundreds of civilians from the locality. A number of abductees, including at
 least seven government officials, were subsequently murdered.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, but the Government at times restricted these rights in practice. The
 media were dominated by the New Vision, a Government-funded daily newspaper
 with a circulation of 40,000 (with up to 10 readers sharing each copy) and a Govern-
 ment-controlled radio station, Radio Uganda. These news sources were of a fairly
 high quality and often included reporting critical of the Government. The Govern-
 ment's occasional use of outdated sedition laws and imprisonment of some members
 of the media led some journalists to practice self-censorship. During the election
 campaigns, the New Vision exhibited a clear pro-NRM editorial bias, and gave more
 prominent coverage to NRM supporters running for office.
 However, the availability of rival nongovernment publications increased. The
 independent Monitor newspaper equaled the New Vision by increasing its circula-
 tion to 40,000; another independent, The Crusader, which began publication in De-
 cember 1995, quickly expanded its circulation and credibility. The East African, a
 Nairobi-based weekly publication that covers Uganda extensively, expanded its cir-
 culation without government hindrance.
 The editor of the most outspoken biweekly, Teddy Seezi Cheeye of the Uganda
 Confidential, was convicted for defamation of Chief Justice Wambuzi and "the publi-
 cation of false news." He continued to face various civil suits for defamation as a
 result of his emphasis on highly personalized and derogatory news and comments;
 the loss of these suits could result in imprisonment.
 The Government controls one television station and the radio station with the
 largest audience. There are three local television stations, three local radio stations,
 and five stations available by satellite. Uncensored Internet access became widely
 available through three commercial service providers in major cities, although its
 price was prohibitive for all but the most affluent noninstitutional users.
 Freedom of speech did not fare well in the context of the transition to constitu-
 tional government, including the presidential and parliamentary elections. Guide-
 lines imposed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs prevented members of the former
 constituent assembly from addressing groups outside their constituencies. Electoral
 rules prohibited "campaigning" by presidential challengers until the official start of
 the campaign 39 days before the election. However, in their official capacity, Presi-
 dent Museveni and senior members of the Government were free to travel through-
 out the country for months prior to the election. Rallies in support of all three presi-
 dential candidates suffered varyig levels of harassment from thugs, in some cases
 resulting in physical injuries,  a peared, however, that such incidents were par-
 ticularly directed at President Museveni's opponents.
 YusefINsubuga Nsambu, a leader of the Conservative party and a supporter of
 presidential challenger Dr. Paul Ssemogerere, was arrested in May and charged
 with sedition for his unflattering descriptions of President Museveni. He was re-
 leased unharmed 2 days later.
 The press and media law, passed in June, requires that journalists be licensed
 and meet certain standards, including holding a university degree. The law provides
 for a Media Council to monitor and discipline journalists. The law also gives the
 Government power to suspend newspapers and to deny access to state information.
 Although the Media Council was established, government officials were not vigor-
 o usly enforcing the law, both for practical and political reasons. In October a pro-
 ducer at an indepenet radio station was briefly detained for broadcasting a pro-
 
 
 302
 
 gram in which guests criticized the government's new value-added tax (VAT). About
 11 others, including a Member of Parliament, were also briefly detained on sus-
 picion of inciting a week-long protest by business owners against the VAT.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at the two public and five pri-
 vate universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or publica-
 tion. Students have sponsored wide-ranging political debates in open forums on
 campus, including an interdisciplinary conference on human rights at Makerere
 University.
 In the past, the Government has required many students and government officials
 to take NRM political education and military science courses known as "Chaka
 Mchaka." These courses have been criticized as indoctrination in NRM political phi-
 losophy, including the view that political parties were responsible for the country's
 civil conflicts before 1986. There were reports that the techniques used in some of
 the courses included intimidation, physical and mental abuse, and sexual harass-
 ment. Although this program was largely in abeyance in 1996, legislation providing
 funding for the Government's "mass mobilization" program was criticized as indi-
 rectly suporting the NRM and could result in the program's revival.
 b. Free dom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government restricts this right in practice. The Con-
 stitution bans political parties both from holding national conventions and opening
 branch offices outside the capital for 5 years.
 During the parliamentary election, the Government denied permits for jublic
 g atherings and rallies by opposition politicians. In Mbale, LDU's fired into the alr
 during a campaign meeting held -by the main presidential challenger Paul
 Ssemogerere. The police issued administrative permits for public gatherings, but re-
 tained the right to deny permits in the interest of public safety. The police pre-
 vented or dispersed at least 13 rallies, seminars, and other public events organized
 by opposition leaders, including Ssemogerere, Uganda Peoples Congress Acting Sec-
 retary General Cecilia Ogwal, the National Freedom Party, and profederalist activ-
 ists.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but the Government restricts
 this right inpractice. NGO's are required to register with the Nongovernmental Or-
 ganizations Board, which includes representation from the Ministry of Internal Af-
 fairs as well as other ministries. The Government generally approves NGO registra-
 tion, although there have been instances in which NGO's considered to be opposed
 to the Government politically have encountered serious difficulties in obtaining reg-
 istration.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution protects freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. There is no state religion. Prisoners are
 given the opportunity to pray on the day appropriate to their faith. Muslim pris-
 oners are usually released from work duties during the month of Ramadan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spected them in practice. A married woman needs to obtain her husband's signature
 on her passport application if children are travelling on the same passport.
 The Government has a policy of providing first asylum for refugees and has re-
 peatedly provided such asylum in recent years to citizens of each of its neighboring
 countries. In 1996 first asylum was granted to nearly 16,000 Zairian asylum seek-
 ers. Approximately 2,000 Rwandan refugees, who have had refugee status in Tanza-
 nia since 1994, entered Uganda in December to avoid repatriation to Rwanda and
 were allowed to remain, although at the year's end they had not been granted refu-
 gee status.
 The Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no reports of
 forced expulsion of-those having a valid claim to refugee status. The Government
 provides first asylum, and in 1996 provided first asylum to more than 240,000 refu-
 gees, the majority from Sudan, the remainder from Rwanda and Zaire. The Govern-
 ment pursues an active program for permanent resettlement of those refugees who
 believe that they can return to their country of origin.
 There were several incidents late in the year in which the Government was un-
 able to provide protection to the Sudanese refugee camps in the north of the country
 when these camps were attacked by rebel forces (see Section 1.g.).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government, but NRM domination of the
 flawed election process limited the effective exercise of this right. In May President
 Museveni was elected with approximately 76 percent of the vote. In June parliamen-
 
 
 303
 tary elections were held in which supporters of the NRM won an overwhelming ma-
 jority of parliamentary seats. Both elections were conducted in a peaceful and or-
 derly manner throughout most of the country. The interim electoral commission
 generally succeeded in carrying out technical aspects of the election in a transparent
 manner. However, constitutional restrictions on political parties and previsions of
 the parliamentary and presidential election laws heavily favored the NRM. Voter
 registers were often inaccurate and not always available for public scrutiny, which
 facilitated a proliferation of fraudulent voters' cards. In some cases, local govern-
 ment officials acted in support of particular candidates for office. The interim elec-
 toral commission undertook nationwide voter education and civic education pro-
 grams. Although in some rural villages, NRM loyalists altered the instruction pro-
 grams to direct voters toward candidates supporting the NRM, the majority of these
 education efforts were well-conceived and productive. Universal suffrage is accorded
 to adults 18 years of age and older. Contrary to the Constitution, this right was de-
 nied to prisoners.
 Although women are underrepresented in government and politics, women play
 a prominent role in national politics. The vice president and the deputy speaker of
 Parliament are women. In addition, each of the nation's 39 districts elected 1
 woman to Parliament to fill a seat reserved for women by provisions of the Constitu-
 tion. Six other women won openly contested seats in the 276-member Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous human rights groups operate in Uganda. Among them are: The FHRI;
 the Uganda chapter of FIDA; the UPAF, which monitors prison conditions; the Na-
 tional Organization for Civic Education and Elections Monitoring, which deals with
 concerns related to civil society and political rights; and the National Women's Or-
 ganization of Uganda. These groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. HURINET, the
 human rights network, an umbrella organization for nine human rights organiza-
 tions active in the country, began publishin  a quarterly human rights newsletter
 in January. Amnesty International began talks with the Government about opening
 a branch office in Kampala in 1997.
 The Constitution established a Human Rights Commission as a permanent inde-
 pendent body with judicial powers. Members of the Commission were named in
 1996, but by year's end had issued no rulings. Government officials were generally
 cooperative and responsive to NGO views. They frequently attended conferences and
 seminars hosted by NGO's on social issues. The Government allowed access by
 international human rights NGO's, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, and
 the ICRC. Scattered reports were received during the presidential election campaign
 that there was harassment of workers associated with some NGO's thought to be
 opposed to President Museveni.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on these factors, but the Govern-
 ment does not effectively enforce the law in matters of local or culturally accepted
 discrimination against women, children, people with disabilities, or certain ethnic
 groups. In Parliament there are special seats designated for women, the disabled,
 and members of the UPDF. Nothing precludes members of these groups from run-
 ning for ordinary seats. Race was not a significant factor in national politics. The
 in the north, and particularly the unconstitutional "Operation
 Panda Gai," led to violations of the rights of many Acholi, the ethnic group which
 comprises a significant part of the northern population.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, remained common. There were
 no laws passed to protect battered women apart from a general law on assault.
 However, legislation was passed to establish a Family and Children's Court; a task
 force was established to implement it. Public opinion and law enforcement officials
 continued to view wife beating as a man's prerogative and rarely intervened in cases
 of domestic violence. Cases were reported in which husbands beat their wives for
 failure to vote according to her husband's wishes. Women remained more likely to
 sue for divorce than to raise assault charges against their husbands while still mar-
 ried. These issues received growing public attention, and female judges, NGO's, and
 other interested parties hosted an international conference on domestic violence,
 marriage, and property rights in August.
 Traditional and widespread discrimination against women continued, especially in
 rural areas, despite constitutional provisions to the contrary. Many customary laws
 discriminate against women in the areas of adoption, marriage, divorce, and devolu-
 
 
 304
 tion of property on death. In most areas in the country, women may not own or in-
 heritproperty, nor may they have custody of their children under local customary
 law. Divorce law sets stricter evidentia y standards for women to prove adultery.
 Women do most of the agricultural work but own only 7 percent of he land. Since
 the implementation of the new Constitution, foreign-born husbands of Ugandan
 women could become citizens. The previous law had allowed only men to sponsor
 their foreign spouses for citizenship. There are limits on a married woman's ability
 to travel a road with her children (see Section 2.d.).
 There are active women's rights groups, including FIDA, Action for Development,
 the National Association of Women Judges of Uganda, and the National Women's
 Organization of Uganda, which promote greater awareness of the rights of women
 and children. FcA is conducting a 3-year project to reform outdated and discrimi-
 natory laws.
 Chddren.-Although it has devoted only limited funds to children's welfare, the
 Government demonstrated a commitment to improving children's welfare with the
 passage of a children's bill to consolidate laws relatingto children and provide for
 their care and protection. The bill stipulated various children's rights and parents'
 responsibilities, including the requirement that "no child shall be employed or en-
 gaged in any activity that may be harmabtl to his or her health education, mental,
 physical or moral development." Nevertheless, the large size of the youth population
 makes it difficult for the Government to enforce prohibitions on child labor (see Sec-
 tion 6.d.). Half the population is under age 18. Current estimates based on 1991 fig-
 ures (the most recent ones available) suggest that the number of orphaned children
 was approximately 1.3 million in 1996 (children missing either parent are consid-
 ered orphans). The high numbero orphans can be attributed to previous civil wars,
 internal displacement of persons, and AIDS.
 There was no system of compulsory education as the Government does not have
 the resources to provide universal schooling. Parents are required to pay for school
 fees, books, and uniforms. During the elections, the President announced a policy
 of providing free education through seventh grade for a maximum of four children
 per family. In December legislation to implement this progam was introduced; it
 was still pending at year's end. This proposed policy caused some consternation for
 the large, often polygynous Ugandan families. Girls and boys theoretically have
 equal access to education, and lower grades are about evenly divided by sex, but
 some observers believe that this new government provision may further support the
 trend of parents to favor education or  a. Parents' inability to afford schooling
 correlates highly with child labor (see Section 6.d.).
 Child abuse remained a serious problem, particularly the rape of young girls
 (known locally as "defilement). Only a small fraction ofthes cases are reported,
 especially when the perpetrator is a family member, neighbor, or teacher, as is often
 the case. Few accusations reach the courts. Neither conviction nor punishment was
 common. Cases were reported frequently in newspapers, but a payment to the girl's
 parents often ended the matter. There are increasing numbers of cass being pros-
 ecuted, such as that of a headmaster in Bushenyi who had raped  onf his 12-year-
 old students and received a 13-year jail term.
 Cooral punishment persisted in many schools. In March a teacher in Mpigi re-
 portedly beat an 8-year-old child to death; he was arrested, and at year's end he
 was free on bail. In August a headmaster in Bulega reportedly beat a 17-year-old
 girl to death. He was arrested and charged in October with committing an ct in-
 tended to cause grievous harm. He denied the charge, and at year's endhe was free
 on bail of about $500.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is practiced
 only by t       ntribe in the Sebei locality ineastern Uganda whose members
 number fewer than 10,000. There is no law against the practice, hut government
 and women's groups working with the U.N. Fund for Population Activities have a
 program to combat the practice through education. In October officials of eastern
 Ugandaws Kapchorwa district (Sebei) discontinued collecting fees from parents of
 young girls who undergo FGM; circumcision fees for boys remained. The step was
 taken in part in response to protests by female health workers, who claimed that
 use of F GM as a source of revenue discouraged officials from helping to end the
 practice.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate government services or fa-
 cilities such as accessibility of buildings for the disabled. Most buildings are one-
 story, but in the larger towns with multistory buildings, there are often no elevators
 and, even where they do exist, they are rarely reliable. Widespread discrimination
 by society and employers limits job and educational opportunities for those with
 physical disabilities. A small office for the disabled withinte Ministry of Local
 
 
 305
 Government lacks sufficient funding. Special elections to fill five parliamentary
 seats allotted to disabled persons were hotly contested, and the media gave exten-
 sive coverage to the issues raised by the candidates. Since being elected, the dis-
 abled memlers have been active in emphasizing issues of concern to people with dis-
 abilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of every per-
 son to join associations or trade unions. In practice, the Government respects the
 right to form unions, and since 1993 this right has been extended to civil servants.
 However, many "essential" government employees are not permitted to form unions;
 these include the police, army, permanent secretaries in the ministries, heads of de-
 partments and state-owned enterprises, school principals, and other management
 level officials.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), the largest labor federation,
 includes 17 unions and is independent of the Government and political parties. Its
 membership was expanded by the recent addition of medical workers, including doc-
 tors, and the civil service union. Nevertheless, NOTU's influence on the overall
 economy remains marginal, since about 90 percent of the work force consists of
 peasant farmers. Even in areas where cash crops are significant, unionization re-
 mained virtually nonexistent. According to the 1988-89 census, about 20 percent of
 an estimated 400,000 workers in the industrial or modern wage sector of the econ-
 omy were unionized.
 The Constitution confirms the right to strike, but government policy requires that
 labor and management make "every effort" to reconcile labor disputes beiore resort-
 ing to strike action. This directive presents unions with a complicated set of restric-
 tions. If reconciliation does not seem possible, labor must submit its grievances and
 notice to strike to the Minister of Labor, who usually delegates the dispute to the
 Industrial Court (IC). The IC, however, has issued no prolabor rulings since Presi-
 dent Museveni expressed his displeasure with its hostility toward the business com-
 munity in 1995. In the absence of verdicts from the IC, the Minister of Labor gen-
 erally did not permit strikes, on the basis that "every effort" had not been ex-
 hausted. Frustrated laborers often went on strike anyway, protesting credibly that
 they were not paid a living wage. Housing conditions and pay complaints led to a
 violent strike in October at the Kakira sugar plantation, resulting in 74 arrests.
 There were 12 major strikes by both union and nonunion labor, including bankers,
 teachers, doctors, health care workers, and sugar cane and tea factory workers.
 Unionized bank employees settled their longstanding dispute with bank owners, but
 their success prompted the nonunion Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) workers to
 follow suit. UCB workers complained that the settlement created anomalies in the
 pay scales. The Government respected the rights of striking workers once they
 walked out. One exception occurred during the Kasaku tea estates strike, where
 workers in a confrontation with management allegedly set fire to the tea fields, per-
 manently destroying 2,500 tea bushes. In spite of a complete lack of evidence, police
 arrested those persons identified by management as troublemakers. The arrested
 workers remained in jail for weeks without bail. The case of the police officer ar-
 rested in 1995 for killing a striker at the Lugazi Sugar Corporation was still pend-
 ing at year's end. In the case of three union leaders of the Ugandan Medical Work-
 ers Association arrested in 1995, the case was delayed several times at the prosecu-
 tion's request and was still pending at year's end. The magistrate threatened to dis-
 miss the charges unless the prosecution produced its witnesses.
 Labor unions freely exercised the right to affiliate with and participate in regional
 and international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 to organize and bargain collectively, but true collective bargaining takes place only
 in the small private sector of the modern economy. In the modern sector, the Gov-
 ernment is by far the largest employer (civil service and state-owned enterprises)
 and it dominates the bargaining process. The Government has, however, adopted a
 tripartite (government-emplyerslabor) ooperative approach to setting wages and
 resolving labor issues. Both the Government and employers may refer disputes to
 the Industrial Court. The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employ-
 er, but apart from a tea plantation arson case (see Section 6.a.), there were no re-
 ported incidents of government harassment of union officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor. However, there is strong evidence that prison officials hired out pris-
 oners to work on private farms and construction sites. Troughout the country, pris-
 on officials routinely augmented their meager pay with crops grown by prisoners on
 
 
 the prison grounds. Male prisoners performed arduous physical labor while female
 prisoners produced marketable handicrafts such as woven basketry. None received
 compensation, although the law demands that pretrial detainees must receive back
 pay for all work that they have performed, once they are released. The Government
 has not reported on the International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention on
 Forced Labor, for which it was cited by the ILO in 1995. The Government was again
 cited in 1996 by the ILO for failure to report. According to the Government, the
 1995 report has been completed and is awaiting submission to the ILO.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Employers are prohibited by law
 from hiring workers below the age of 18, but child labor is widespread. The Ministry
 of Social Services is charged with enforcing the law on child labor, but it has few
 resources to do so. Part of the problem is demographic, as half the population is
 under 18 years of age. School fees make it impossible for many parents-particu-
 larly poor farmers, the majority of the population-to give their children an edu-
 cation. As a result, there is an incentive to leave school and go into agricultural or
 domestic work in order to help meet expenses or perform the work of absent or in-
 firm parents, a common situation throughout the country. About 55 percent of
 school-age children are in school.
 Most working children are employed in the informal sector, often on the subsist-
 ence farms of extended family members or as domestic servants. In urban areas,
 children peddle small items on the streets, become involved in the sex trade, or beg
 for money. Some of the largest sectors also employ child labor. The vast tea planta-
 tions pay by the weight of tea leaves harvested; although most tea harvesting is
 done by adults, some children are also employed.
 Smuggling, one of the nation's larger informal industries, illegally employs large
 numbers of child laborers at the Kenyan and Tanzanian borders. Children walk
 back and forth across the unguarded borders transporting small amounts of coffee,
 fuel, sugar, or other commodities.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government does not set a minimum
 wage. Wages continued to be determined through negotiation between individuals
 and their employers, unions and proprietors, or through negotiation within the
 boards of directors at state-owned industries. Salaries are usually augmented by
 other incentives such as housing and transport allowances, which often equal base
 wages. The Ministry of Labor's salary scale for civil servants starts with unskilled
 labor at $50 (51,133 shillings) per month, up to supervisors at $400 (414,738 shil-
 lings) per month, plus modest increases for years served. All include provisions for
 paid overtime. The higher end of this scale would provide minimal support for a
 worker and family, but most civil servants have great difficulty earning enough
 money to pay their children's school fees. Many civil servants andtheir dependents
 work in second jobs, grow their own food, or seek other ways to feed themselves.
 In industries that employ workers on an hourly basis, the normal workweek was
 40 hours. Although there was no legal maximum workweek, a time-and-a-half rate
 was paid for each additional hour worked. Many industries pay workers by piece-
 work, which avoids overtime and circumvents the prohibition on child labor.
 The condition of employee housing on the tea and sugar plantations, at the major
 state-owned corporations, and within military and police barracks was substandard.
 Such conditions contributed to one strike in October (see Section 6.a.). Sanitation
 and water facilities are often lacking.
 In downtown Kampala, buildings are routinely expanded upward by the addition
 of several cement floors. Some structures have tripled in height above the original
 foundations, leading local engineers to express reservations about the structural in-
 tegrity of these workplaces. Factories are generally sound, but machinery almost al-
 ways lacks safeguards. The Federation of Uganda Employers held a training con-
 vention in May to address the enhancement of the currently inadequate occupa-
 tional health and safety practices and training.
 Vestiges of occupational health and safety legislation are contained in the out-
 dated Factories Act of 1954, the Employment Decree of 1975, and the Workmen's
 Compensation Act of 1964. None of these acts addresses present-day working haz-
 ards. The acts do not protect workers who refuse to perform dangerous work from
 being fired, although strong unions in certain dangerous industries do protect such
 workers. The Ministry of Labor's Department of Occupational Health is responsible
 for enforcement of the limited occupational safety regulations, but in practice inspec-
 tions are rare, due primarily to the lack of inspectors' vehicles. Under the outdated
 legislation, the maximum award payable in workers' compensation to a disabled em-
 ployee, or to the estate of employees killed on the job, is $38.
 
 
 307
