 UGANDA
 President Yoweri Museveni and his National Resistance Movement
 (NRM) took power in January 1986 after a 5-year guerrilla
 struggle against the regimes of Milton Obote and Tito Okello.
 Museveni replaced their parliamentary structures with an
 unelected interim government headed by.the National Resistance
 Council (NRC). Competitive nonparty elections in 1989 expanded
 the NRC and brought in representatives from all parts of th
 country. Later that year the transition to civilian government
 promised for 1990 was postponed 5 years to allow consultations
 on a new constitution. Museveni continues to exercise
 authority through the NRC, an appointed cabinet, and the armed
 forces. Opposition parties have grown increasingly active in
 defiance of a ban on partisan political activity.' Neither the
 political opposition, the judiciary, the Inspector General of
 Government, nor any other institution serves-as an effective
 check on executive power.
 The National Resistance Army (NRA) is the'key security
 structure in Uganda. The army was expanded tenfold between
 1986 and 1991, increasing its political power within the
 Government. The wholesale absorption of the armies of previous
 regimes and rebel groups eroded discipline within the'NRA...
 Soldiers and deserters have committed armed robberies, torture,
 and murder. Some of those apprehended have been punished, and
 the NRA has accepted liability for some abusesperpetrated in
 the field. The Government claims that 10 soldiers have been'
 executed since 1989, and 30 more are under sentence of death
 for crimes against civilians. The army, along with' 16cal
 defense forces and village "spear and arrow" groups, also
 performs police functions in'rural areas. The-Ugandan police
 have been, expanded in recent years, but much of the force is
 corrupt, ill-trained, and poorly equipped.. The. Internal
 Security Organization (ISO is responsible for intelligence and
 security.
 Uganda's economic growth rate slowed to below 3 percent in 1991
 from 3.2 percent in 1990 and over 6 percent in preceding
 years. This was due primarily to the collapse of offee prices
 in 1989. Efforts to diversify the economy have ih&reased
 exports of' tobacco, cottur,.and tEa, but coffee still provides
 roughly 70 percent of the cduntry'E; export earnings. As a
 result of' a deepening current account deficit, foreign aid
 contributed. 60 percent of. government spendirng in 1991. In
 accordance with reforms supported by the International Monetary
 Fund, the number 6f government minisfers was reduced from T2-to
 38, and a reduction of 6Q,000 in-the civil service was
 announced. Inflation,. which was brought down to 25 percent in
 1990, is again. on the- rise. tittle progress has been made .to
 alleviate- rural poverty-.
 In 199L the continuing insurgency -n northern Ugand7 remained
 the principal cause of most human rights abuses. Rebels
 abducted, disfigured, raped. and kirleTc ivilians. NRA
 operations in. the area from March to June resulted in mass
 detentions and incidents of rape and summary execution. About
 1,000 persons the Government alleges were soldiers were
 convicted of desertion and sentenced to 5- to lO-year prison
 terms in administrative.hearings without the benefit of due
 process. Outside areas of unrest, there continue. to be some
 abuses: the Government atrrested potential political opponents
 and journalists, and prisoners were mistreated. At the end of
 1991, over 150. Ugandans arrested since 1986 were awaiting trial
 on treason charges. In response to criticism of its human
 rights record, the Government established a high level ad hoc
 
 
 426
 UGANDA
 committee to address the situation, with a particular focus on
 conditions in military barracks. The committee, however, had
 not yet begun to function by year's end. Other problem areas
 were the denial of peaceful assembly and association, the
 inability of citizens to change their government through
 democratic means, and persistent societal discrimination
 against women. None of the five commissions of inquiry set up
 to investigate human rights abuses in previous years had
 released their findings by the end of 1991.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There is no evidence that the Government sanctioned political
 killings in 1991; however, the army and police were responsible
 for many civilian deaths (see Section l.g.Y. Policemen and
 soldiers have also been implicated in armed robbery, extortion,
 and murder outside of areas of insurgency.
 b. Disappearance
 Hundreds of civilians were uprooted by conflict, and not all
 were accounted for by the end of 1991. Most of those detained
 by the army were subsequently released or reappeared in
 barracks or prison. An unknown number were abducted by rebels,
 some of whom later escaped. No government-sponsored
 disappearances are known to have occurred in 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 During the first half of 1991 the NRA reportedly tortured
 prisoners in the field and in barracks. Suspects were
 frequently beaten when apprehended and sometimes hobbled by
 blows to the ankles.. Some detainees were bound by the hands
 and feet or suspended by the elbows behind the back and
 beaten. Daily caning of some detainees resulted in festering
 sores which bred maggots and caused death. A subcounty
 chairman from Mbale was severely tortured by soldiers,
 suspended by the hands for 2 days and beaten, causing paralysis
 and temporary deafness. In a few instances, detainees were
 shot or bayoneted in the feet, jabbed with nails and pins, and
 burned with cigarettes and molten objects. In response, the
 army replaced the general in command of the antirebel operation
 in the North and launched an investigation, which was not
 completed by the end of the year.
 Eighteen prominent northerners, includ-ing former Minister of
 State for Foreign and Regional Affairs Omara Atubo and NRC
 members Zachary Olum and Irene Apio Julu, were-beaten and-
 humiliated after their arrest on treason charges in April. One
 suffered-a fractured wrist, another internal bleeding, and most
 incurred bruises as a result of being "frog marched"--cuffed by
 the ankles and beaten as they were forced to shuffle along to
 the aircraft that took them to Kampala. The Government
 acknowledges that the la were tortured before they were brought
 to detention in Kampala. Allegations that they have been-
 tortured since their arrival in Kampala have not been
 substantiated.
 
 
 427
 UGANDA
 Beatings are occasionally administered at police stations.
 Some 435 Muslim youths arrested in March for rioting were
 allegedly tortured by the police. Most police torture.
 however, is done in an unofficial capacity. Policemen
 sometimes supplement their incomes by torturing or killing
 civilians for a fee.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visited 23
 prisons, 26 police stations, and 31 military barracks and NRA
 detachments throughout Uganda in 1991. The Inspector General
 of Government (IGG),visited three police stations and found no
 evidence of torture. Planned IGG visits t6 other police
 stations, prisons, and barracks were not carried out for lack'
 of resources. The visits were a genuine effort to ensure
 proper treatment of prisoners, but their value was limited by
 being arranged with the police in advance.
 Conditions of detention are uniformly harsh. Food and sleep
 deprivation is common since Luzira Prison, intended for 600
 inmates, currently holds 2,0a0. Unhygienic conditions and
 water shortageshave caused epidemics of dysentery. Supplies
 intended for detainees are often diverted for sale.. Prisoners
 do not have access to proper medical care, due in part to a
 lack'of transport and facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Ugandan law, a suspect must be charged within 24 hours of
 his arrest and brought to trial within-480 days. Neither
 requirement is scrupulously enforced. The Public Order and
 Security Act of 1967 (the "detention order") permits unlitited
 detention without charge- but was not invoked in 1991.
 Treason is often used as a holding charge while investigations
 are undertaken. Over 150 Ugandans arrested between 1996 and
 1991 are awaiting trial on treason- charges in 9 major cases.
 Many appear to-have been arbitrarily arrested. No evidence had
 been. presented by year's end against the I& northern
 politicians arrested in April-, despite repeated assurances by
 government-officials of concern-for thL- importance of their
 ease. The only offense committed by somewas apparently-to-
 advocate multiparty politics. Defense- attorneys attempted
 unsuccessfully to have the case dismissed or' the grounds that
 the charges were so vague as to be "fatally defective." The
 High Court dismissed the petition on the grounds that the-
 defendants would simply be rearrested.
 In August, 34 of 43 suspects-held since l-988 in another treason
 case were released for lack of-ewidence. The nine remaining
 suspects- including prominent businessman Joseph Lusse, were-
 still bein held for trial at the end of IS91. It is a-Ileged
 that they conspired to- overthrow the Government By force of
 arms and set up a training camp- for that purpose in Mukono
 between July and September 1988. Many other opposition figures
 remained in detention on suspicion of treason at year's end'.
 In March and April, the NRA rounded up thousands of villagers
 in the north and herded them into stadiums, military camps, and
 open fields for screening. Over 2,000 were held without
 shelter in Gulu stadium on March 30. Several hundred were
 detained in- Kitgum. About 1, 00--who the Government claims are
 soldiers-were convicted of desertion and sentenced to 5- to
 10-year prison terms in administrative hearings without the
 benefit of due process. Most of these were being held at
 year's end in barracks and prisons around the country.
 
 
 428
 UGANDA
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. A
 presidential amnesty for former rebels is in effect and applies
 to opponents in exile. Those who return, however, may be
 prosecuted for criminal acts they may have committed. A number
 of prominent opposition figures have taken advantage of the
 amnesty.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair trial in Uganda is circumscribed by a
 serious backlog of cases, a refusal by military authorities to
 respect civilian court orders, the use of military field
 tribunals in remote areas, and an inadequate system of judicial
 administration.
 The Ugandan court system consists of magistrate's courts, the
 High Court, and the Supreme Court. The judicial system
 contains procedural safeguards modeled after British law,
 including the granting of bail and appeals to higher courts.
 Members of the legal profession are highly educated and
 generally respected. Accused persons, if brought to trial,
 generally receive a fair public hearing, although the process
 of justice is slow. There are no- legal aid services for the
 general public. The independence of the judiciary is limited
 by the President's power to dismiss High Court and Supreme
 Court judges. The President appoints the members of a judicial
 service commission which must concur in all dismissals.
 Resistance Councils (RC) in rural areas have authority to
 settle civil disputes, such as questions about land ownership
 or payment of bills at the local level. RC decisions may be
 appealed in magistrate's courts. When an RC chairman exceeded
 his authority by sentencing a woman to death for witchcraft,
 and a local mob carried out the sentence, the RC officer was
 charged with murder. Suspected thieves and other offenders
 caught committing a crime are often subject to mob justice.
 They are beaten or even killed without due process. Those
 administering this justice are rarely prosecuted.
 Military tribunals hear charges against soldiers, and any
 soldier accused of a capital offense must be assigned counsel.
 Punishment is strict, and several NRA soldiers have been
 executed after being convicted by military tribunals. Those
 found guilty serve time in civilian prisons. An NRA legal aid
 scheme was established in August to defend soldiers in civil
 and criminal cases on a limited basis. The NRA code of conduct
 provides for field tribunals to dispense justice in remote
 areas. An unknown number of soldiers and civilians were
 executed by order of field tribunals in the spring.
 The military persists in detaining people who have been
 acquitted in courts of law. Military authorities commonly
 ignore court orders to release detainees.
 A 1989 law permitting the establishment of special magistrate's
 courts in areas of insurgency has never been implemented.
 Nevertheless, like the detention order, it is unlikely to be
 revoked. Commissions charged with reforming and updating the
 laws have not functioned for years.
 The NRA claims that its detainees are military personnel--
 deserters or rebels--not subject to civil law. They were
 apparently denied due process, being convicted en masse without
 appearing before courts-martial. They have not had access to
 family, friends, or lawyers. Many have been tortured. Most of
 
 
 429
 UGANDA
 the persons held without charge in military barracks prior to
 1991 have been released, except those charged with capital
 offenses.
 About half of those imprisoned in Uganda have not yet been
 brought to trial. Government statistics show that some
 detainees have been on remand for 5 years, and more than 500
 have been held without trial for over 480 days. Prosecutors
 have reportedly lost some 900 case files. In 1991 preparations
 were under way to clear the backlogby releasing those who have
 been held longer than the term to which they would likely be
 sentenced. However, judges have proven unwilling to release
 those charged with capital offenses even after 480 days.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In 1991 roads and communication channels were blocked and
 house-to-house searches carried out in the army's
 cordon-and-search operations in Gulu, Lira, Kitgum, and Apac
 districts. Search warrants, which are required by law, were
 not obtained for these operations.
 Outside of areas of insurgency, the Government does not
 generally intrude in the privacy, family, or home of citizens,
 and there is no indication that.Xhe Governmentzii~terfered with
 private correspondence in 1991.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Abuses by both rebel and military forces escalated sharply in
 northern Uganda in the spring. The NRA undertook a "final
 offensive" against the insurgent United Democratic Christian
 Army (UDCA). UDCA rebels assassinated RC chairmen and others
 associated with the NRM Government. They raided villages for
 supplies, conducted forced recruitment, and abducted boys and
 girls for porters and "wives." The rebels often disfigured
 their victims, cutting off ears, fingers, noses,-or genitals..
 The Secretary of State for Defense, Major General David
 Tinyefusa, told the Uganda Human Rights Activists organization
 on May 11 that there was "no time to take captives" during the
 cordon-and-search operation. Helicopters may have been used to
 bomb civilian targets. There were unconfirmed reports of
 civilian deaths and injuries- caused by bombing missions on July
 8, July 28, and July 30. After the offensive in the four
 northern districts, the UDCA was reduced to small groups
 engaged in banditry to survive. Tinyefusa was replaced by
 General Mugisha Muntu at the conclusion of the operation.
 Reports of abuses dropped off sharply following the change in
 command.
 Skirmishes around Gulu- town early in March led to the shooting
 of civilians and the burning of-property. Later that month
 security forces shot and killed several civilians when a public
 meeting began to disperse before a government speaker had
 arrived. The Government admits that 5 were killed; the
 opposition Uganda People's Congress (UPC) claims that the
 number was over 100. Also in March, villagers and peasants
 were forcibly displaced from Loro village in Apac district by
 the NRA.
 At the end of March, soldiers in northern towns began
 systematic house-to-house searches, detaining thousands of
 
 
 430
 UGANDA
 civilians who lacked poll tax receipts or other documentation
 showing that they were legitimately employed or residents of
 the area. They were often held without shelter or facilities
 for days. An unknown number, probably less than 100, were shot
 outright.
 Some suspected rebels were reportedly forced into pits and
 suffocated with smoke from fires lit around the edge.
 According to some reports, NRA units herded villagers into huts
 and burned them to death. In April, 22 were allegedly
 incinerated at Kanyoke, 14 others at Angole Awere, and an
 unspecified number in other burning incidents in Gulu.
 In the eastern Teso region, rebels of the Uganda People's Army
 (UPA) engaged in low intensity insurgency throughout 1991. NRA
 operations against the UPA did not entail the widespread
 excesses seen in the north. However, the Government's Local
 Defense Units (LDU) were responsible for numerous abuses.
 LDU's are composed mainly of former rebels armed by the NRM to
 protect villages from attack. Lacking discipline, they
 frequently beat civilians, rape and pillage, and shoot
 suspected rebels. The rebels have taken revenge on the same
 villagers, particularly relatives of LDU members. The
 Government has not disciplined the LDU's for these abuses.
 Several thousand Ugandans were displaced in the southwest
 during 1991 due to fighting on the Rwanda border. Civilians as
 well as NRA troops have been killed as a result of combat
 between the Rwandan Patriotic Front and the Rwandan army.
 Policemen and soldiers harass and kill civilians in nominally
 peaceful areas. In one case a detachment commander and his
 deputy were arrested for the murder of an RC chairman who had
 reported their mistreatment of civilians. Both soldiers and
 policemen are reliably reported to have taken prisoners for
 ransom. Corruption and extortion have led to numerous cases of
 harassment or violence as well as unlawfur detention.
 The Government-has been slow to investigate reports of
 extrajudicial killings, especially in areas of rebel activity.
 It pleads a lack of office support and transport to carry out
 investigations. However, soldiers have been punished for human
 rights violations in the field under terms of the NRA code of
 conduct. About 10 executions were reported in the press in the
 first half of 1991, the same number that the Government claims
 were executed in the 3 years since 1989.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is restricted by a ban on partisan political
 activity. Political parties may not hold press conferences or
 organize public rallies. In the 1989 National Resistance
 Council elections, candidates were prohibited from mentioning
 party affiliation. In 1991 several outspoken politicians were
 arrested, beaten, and charged with treason (see Section l.d.).
 These arrests undoubtedly tightened self-censorship among
 others. Despite these restricti.ons, open debate occurs in the
 NRC, the media, and public forums. Public figures openly
 criticize government policies, corruption, and human rights
 abuses.
 Over a dozen newspapers publish a wide range of viewpoints
 covering the political spectrum. Despite the ban on partisan
 
 
 431
 UGANDA
 activity, several parties publish newspapers to promote their
 views. The Democratic Party (DP) publication, The Citizen, is
 often critical of government policy, as is the pro-DP magazine
 Exposure. The NRM owns the New Vision, which has.accurately
 reported on corruption in government and human rights abuses by
 the NRA. It has also reprinted exaggerated allegations of
 human rights abuses in Uganda that have appeared in foreign
 publications to discredit the Government's critics.
 Although the press enjoys considerable freedom, the NRA
 detained some journalists during "Operation North," and others
 have been arrested on sedition, defamation, and other charges.
 John Baptist Kyeyune, editor of The Citizen, was arrested-for
 sedition after criticizing a NRA plan to disburse cash to
 soldiers in lieu of food rations. He was released on bail, and
 his case had not come to trial by the end of the year. Saul
 Katabarwa, editor of the weekly Guide, was arrested'for
 defaming the Minister of Justice in Nov6mber and later released
 on bail. Captain Roland Kakooza, publisher of Economy and
 Mulengera and an employee of the NRM secretariat, was also
 charged with sedition in October. The Government canceled the
 accreditation of British Broadcasting Corporation stringer
 Epajjar Ejalu for allegedly filing opinionated stories. Teddy
 Seezi Cheye, editor of Uganda. Confidential, was issued a
 criminal summons for selling a nonregistered publication, but-
 charges were dropped. Unlike the regimes that preceded it, the
 NRM Government has not instituted formal censorship. However,
 the legal provisions for doing so are still in force.
 Uganda Television and Radio Uganda are controlled by the
 Government. They disseminate NRM views but also broadcast
 discussions of -public policy that reflect a variety of opinion.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful'Assembly and Association
 All associations in Uganda must register with the Government.
 Permits for public gatherings must be obtained from police
 authorities, who have the right to. deny the permit in the
 interest of public safety, Although'politicalparties are n~t
 banned, political activity is not allowed; thus large
 gatherings are usually held either on government-sponsored or
 religious occasions. In kare-cases, permits have been denied
 to fundamentalist religious groups for fear of public
 disturbances. Professional associations operate without
 hindrance, as do international service associations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no- state religion in Uganda. ehristianity, Islam,
 Hinduism, and-African traditional religions are-freely
 practiced. Conversion between religions is-not obstructed.
 Foreign missilonaries and other relfgigus figures- are generally
 welcome- in Uganda. There- s no government control of- religious
 publications-, even those- with an antigovernment bias. -
 Religious leaders frequently speak out publicly on topics
 relating to their followers' welfare, addressing in particular
 human rights, security, and political issues.
 In March four policemen were killed by Muslim demonstrators
 protesting a decision by the Ugandan Supreme Court concerning
 the authority of a rival Muslim leader. There were no reports
 of casualties among demonstrators; 435 youths of the Tabliq
 sect were arrested and charged with the murders. Four of their
 number were separated for their own protection after being
 sentenced to death by their colleagues as police informants.
 
 
 432
 UGANDA
 In December murder charges against all but 10 of the youths
 were dropped, -and I was released for lack of evidence. At the
 end of the year, 10 were still held at Luzira prison on murder
 charges, and 224 continued to b6 held for rioting and
 maliciously damaging property.
 The Jehovah's Witnesses experienced problems receiving
 residence permits and constructing houses of worship in 1990.
 In 1991 the Church was denied the status of a nongovernmental
 organization because it does not allow its followers to
 participate in civic duties. As a result, the Church cannot
 legally host foreign missionaries, and most have been required
 to leave. Some adherents of the Church have been questioned
 about their allegiance to the state, and some have been warned
 by district officials not to hold services.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement was severely curtailed during military
 operations in the north. The four affected districts were
 cordoned off for 3 months. Roadblocks--notably one at Karuma
 bridge on the main route to the north--prevented many civilians
 from entering or leaving the region. Routine commerce was
 restored to much of the north during the summer. Travel in the
 east, and particularly Karamoja in the northeast, remains
 difficult due to sporadic attacks by armed bandits.
 Ugandans are free to emigrate and to travel abroad.
 Uganda accommodates refugees from Sudan, Rwanda, Kenya, Zaire,
 and other countries. There were 149,000 registered and an
 estimated 150,000 unregistered refugees in Uganda in 1991.
 Most of the latter are Rwandans who have lived in Uganda since
 the early 1960's. A further influx of 9,000 resulted from the
 invasion of Rwanda from Ugandan territory by the Rwandan
 Patriotic Front in October 1990. The number of Sudanese
 refugees in-Uganda increased from about 59,000 at the beginning
 of the year to 67,000 at the end of 1991. Most of the new
 Sudanese refugees were young men fleeing forced conscription by
 the Sudanese People's Liberation Army. There were no instances
 of expulsion or forced repatriation of refugees in 1991.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Ugandan citizens cannot change their government by democratic
 means. Representatives are popularly elected to local RC's
 which in turn elect representatives to higher RC's up to the
 National Resistance Council. Special district and women's
 representatives, cabinet ministers, presidential appointees,
 and "historical members" also serve on the NRC. President
 Museveni serves as chief executive, Minister of Defense, and
 Chairman of the National Executive Council. Ve was not elected
 and has never faced a vote of confidence. District
 administrators, who can overrule RC's, are also directly
 appointed. There are no meaningful checks and balances on
 presidential power. Since independence in-1962 Uganda has
 never had an orderly change of government, and the NRM has
 failed to provide that opportunity for 6 years.
 A 21-member constitutional commission appointed in December
 1988 conducted seminars throughout the country and solicited
 proposals on Uganda's future form of government. The
 consultative process was completed in 1991, and a draft
 
 
 433
 UGANDA
 constitution is expected to be completed by June 1992. The
 process of ratification has not yet been determined. The
 Government proposed that the draft constitution be submitted to
 the NRC and the NRA Council for ratification, while others have
 called for a constituent assembly to be elected for the
 purpose. President Museveni has pledged that the future
 constitution will be based on the preferences of the public
 rather than on a NRM blueprint.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International, and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although the NRM created several bodies to address human rights
 abuses in Uganda, no official findings have ever been issued.
 The Uganda Human Rights Commission was created to investigate
 abuses perpetrated before 1986, but its work has been hampered
 by lack of resources. The Office of the Inspector General of
 Government (IGG) was originally charged with investigating,
 inter alia, human rights abuses,. but in October President,
 Museveni directed it to focus solely on corruption. In August
 the President named an official adhoc committee to investigate
 the status of persons held on remand-and in military barracks,
 but the committee had not visited any places of detention by
 the end of the year.
 There are two local, nongovernmental organizations that deal
 with human rights:- the Uganda Human Rights Activists and the
 Uganda.Law Society. Two human rights conferences were held.
 during the year. Both conferences included open criticism of
 the Government's human rights record and of the lack of a
 permanent official body charged with investigatin abuses.
 Representatives- of Amnesty International met officials of the
 Uganda Law-Society, the Ministry of Justice, the Uganda Human
 Rights Activists, and the Commission of Prisons in August.
 However, the Government did not permit them to visit prisons
 except in the presence of prison officers- The New York Bar
 Association and other human. rights groups also carried out
 inqu.iri-ea in Uganda in 1991- The Bar Association issued its
 report in July which was highly critical of human rights
 conditions in the country. Nevertheless, release of the report
 was covered in the local media.
 In April the Human Rights Unit in the Commonwealth Secretariat
 held a workshop for- Ugandan, Kenyan, Tanzanian, and Zimbabwean
 officials in Mukono..
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex. Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Africans of three ethnic groups--Bantir (south), Ntlotic
 (north), and Nilo-hami-tir (east)--constitute most of the-
 population. Of these groups, the Bantu is the largest and
 includes the Baganda, which, with more than 1 million members,
 is the largest tribe.- Ethnic divisions have been aggravated.by
 civil conflict. The Acholi and Langi of northern Uganda feel
 oppressed-by the Bantus of the south. They point to the NRA's
 harsh tactics in the north-, low investment in the region, and
 Bantu overrepresentation in the Cabinet, ministries, and the
 military command as evidence of discrimination. The
 Banyankole, Baganda, and other Southern tribes, in turn, fear
 and distrust the northerners who have traditionally dominated
 the military. Many Ugandans disdain the Karamojong as violent
 and underdeveloped, an attitude encouraged by the group's
 
 
 434
 UGANDA
 penchant for raiding cattle. The NRM's broad-based cabinets
 were intended to knit these groups together, but ethnic
 discrimination persists.
 The Government has made a determined effort to redress
 discrimination based on sex. Women hold positions of
 responsibility at all levels of government. In the NRC, 38
 women hold positions, and 4 are cabinet ministers. A Ministry
 of Women's Affairs was established in 1988. Women have been
 appointed judges, and women representatives to the NRC were
 elected from each district in 1989. Women are represented on
 the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Education Policy Review
 Commission, and the Uganda Constitutional Commission. At the .
 end of 1991, labor laws relating to women were reviewed by the
 National Organization of Trade Unions, the Federation of Uganda
 Employers, and government ministries.
 Discrimination against women, especially in rural areas,
 continues- as a result of traditional and family laws.
 Customary laws which discriminate against women are still
 recognized in the areas of adoption, marriage, divorce, burial,
 devolution of property on death, or other matters of personal
 law in which customary law is recognized. Women may not own or
 inherit property or have custody of their children under
 customary law. Adultery by men is treated more leniently than
 adultery by women. Women jeopardize their Ugandan citizenship
 by marrying a foreigner, whereas foreign women who marry
 Ugandans automatically receive Ugandan citizenship. The
 Ugandan Women's Lawyers Association estimates that 50 percent
 of marriages in Uganda are polygamous. Women do most of the
 agricultural work. The International Federation of Women
 Lawyers established a legal aid clinic in Uganda in 1988 to
 deal with disputes rising out of these inequities.
 President Museveni and other Government officials have spoken
 out against violence against women, and in 1990 the NRC passed
 a law which-allows the death penalty for rape. Wife beating
 remains a pervasive problem, however, and, fearing divorce or
 embarrassment, women seldom report such abuse to the
 authorities. Some women continue to view wife beating as a
 customary practice and are not aware that it is against the
 law. The Ugandan Women's Association distributes a leaflet
 entitled "Wife Beating is Against the Law" to inform women of
 their rights. In 1991 the Federatibn of Uganda Women Lawyers
 Association published a research report "Violence.Against Women
 in Uganda" which found that such violence is endemic in Kampala
 district. Most Ugandan ethnic groups do not engage in female
 circumcision, and the Government actively discourages the
 practice where it does occur, mainly among tribes in Eastern
 Uganda.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Ugandan law recognizes the right of workers to form unions, but
 in practice that right only applies to private sector workers.
 In November 1990, the Deputy Minister of Labor announced that
 the law would be amended to allow civil servants to unionize.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU) is a national
 labor federation which all unions in Uganda are required to
 join. NOTU has long demanded that teachers, nurses, lecturers,
 professors, and other public workers should be permitted to
 form unions.
 
 
 . 435
 
 UGANDA
 NOTU's influence on the overall economy remains marginal, since
 about 90 percent of the Ugandan work force consists of peasant
 farmers. Even among industrial workers, high inflation and
 lack of transportation have made it difficult for individual
 unions to organize, especially outside the major commercial
 centers of Kampala and Jinja.
 The right to strike is also recognized by law, but the
 Government expects all efforts at reconciling labor disputes to
 be exhausted before workers resort to strikes. They must first
 submit their grievances and notice to strike to the Minister of
 Labor. Under the Trades Disputes Arbitration and Settlement
 Act, the Industrial Court hears trade disputes referred to it
 either by the Minister of Labor or the parties to the dispute.
 NOTU has proposed that the right to strike be recognized in the
 future constitution.
 Three successful strikes occurred in 1991. In May six
 Tanzanian instructors at Soroti flying school went on strike
 after going unpaid for 8 months. In July-TUMPECO workers.also
 struck over unpaid salaries. In September employees of the
 Kakira sugar works won a 70-percent wage increase after
 shutting down the factory and blockading the premises.
 A tripartite committee composed of NOTU, the Federation of
 Uganda Employers (FUE), and relevant government ministries was
 instituted in mid-1991 to recommend amendments to outdated
 labor laws, many of which were enacted 30'years ago. On May I.
 the committee announced the reintroduction of an industrial
 training council and submitted a new employment act to the
 Attorney General. The Ministry of Public Service announced an
 implementation and monitoring board to handle the reduction of
 workers and justify layoffs in the civit service- NOTU freely
 exercises the right to affiliatL with- and participate in
 regional and international labor organizations.
 b- The Right to Organize and: Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain-col-Iectively is recognized by
 law and established in practice. Unionization and collective
 bargaining are common in the industrial wage sector but are
 much less significant in the agriculrtural sector. Although the
 National Union of Prantation and Agricultural Workers exists-
 the vast majority of small cul-tivators organize themselves on
 the basis of cooperatives for the purpose of selling their
 craps, Union officials are not harassed, and unions have
 access to the Industrial Court.
 There are nor export processing zones in Uganda.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by law. No inspections or
 sanctions-are in prlace-to enforce the law, but there is little
 evidence of forced labor in Uganda.
 Under the NRA code of conduct, soldiers tried by military
 tribunals may be sentenced to forced labor as part of their
 punishment. At present applications for discharge are made on
 an individual basis; in practice, soldiers who want to leave
 simply desert. The National Resistance Army Bill of 1991
 introduced a 9-year term of service for enlisted men.
 
 
 436
 UGANDA
 d. -Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Employers are prohibited from recruiting workers below the age
 of 12. The minimum age is widely expected to be raised by the
 proposed Employment Act. Many children are nevertheless
 employed out of economic necessity. Enforcement of mimimum age
 restrictions by the Ministry of Labor is limited.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 No explicit minimum wage policy exists in Uganda. Wages are
 set by negotiation between unions and employers or by the
 boards of directors of state-owned industries. This results in
 glaring wage discrepancies between the civil service and the
 private sector. A government worker does not earn enough to
 provide a decent living for a family. Thus, many find second
 jobs, grow their own food, or engage in pilferage or corruption
 in order to feed their families and pay school fees. Although
 there is no legal maximum workweek, the normal workweek is 48
 hours, and time and a half must be paid for each additional
 hour worked.
 The only occupational health and safety legislation in place is
 contained in the outdated Factories Act of 1954, which
 concentrates on engineering aspects of work and does not
 address many present day working hazards. It is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor's Department of Occupational -ealth but,
 in practice, little inspection takes place due to lack of
 resources.
 
 
 437
