Uganda
After 27 years in office, President Yoweri Museveni’s government increasingly
suppresses freedom of assembly, expression, and association while escalating
threats to civil society. Two media houses faced temporary closure in 2013 for
publishing articles suggesting that Museveni is grooming his son to take over
the presidency. Debate around presidential succession, accountability of public
resources, governance, and other politically sensitive topics is increasingly constrained.
Activists who provide public information about government expenditure
and corruption are obstructed from demonstrating and sometimes face
criminal charges such as inciting violence, while opposition politicians are regularly
prevented from holding public rallies.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
After two years of sporadic debate, Parliament passed the Public Order
Management bill in August 2013 and the president assented shortly after, further
restricting space for dissent and public critiques of governance. The controversial
bill was considerably amended just before passage, but it remains
vague, making it open to abusive application. The law still grants police wide
discretionary powers to permit or disallow public meetings.
Throughout the year opposition politicians faced arrest, detention, and criminal
charges for holding public assemblies in Uganda. In July, seven opposition
politicians were charged in a Kampala court for belonging to and managing an
“unlawful society,” Activists for Change (A4C), a political pressure group the
government had banned in 2012 on spurious grounds. Earlier, in February, 15
people, including the mayor of Kampala and then-opposition leader Kizza
Besigye, were charged with organizing an unlawful assembly. Both cases were
pending at time of writing.
The government continues to be hostile to independent media publishing politically
sensitive articles. On May 7, the Daily Monitor newspaper detailed an
alleged conspiracy to frame or eliminate high-ranking members of the government
who do not support the plan for Museveni’s son to take over when his
father steps down. On May 20, more than 50 uniformed police sealed off the
Daily Monitor’s premises after it published a letter allegedly written by Uganda’s coordinator of intelligence service, Gen. David Sejjusa. Two radio stations
located in the same compound were also forced off air by the Uganda
Communications Commission. The same day, police closed the Red Pepper,
another newspaper, on similar grounds. Three days later, the court withdrew
the search warrant but police defied the orders and increased their presence.
Two journalists and eight civil society members protesting the closures were
arrested, beaten, and detained by police. They were charged with inciting violence
before being released. The newspapers and radio stations were opened
10 days later when the minister of internal affairs ordered the police to vacate
the premises. The charges were still pending at time of writing.
Corruption
Corruption in Uganda remains pervasive at both low and high levels of public
administration. Bribery, nepotism, and misuse of official positions and
resources are widespread in spite of continuous assurances from the president
that corruption will be eradicated. Major corruption scandals have surfaced
repeatedly in the last few years, though no high-ranking officials have served
prison sentences for corruption-related offences. Scandals have rocked the
health services, particularly regarding the misuse of funds intended for the provision
of immunizations and essential medicines to fight HIV, tuberculosis, and
malaria.
The embezzlement in 2012 of US$12.7 million in donor funds from the Office of
the Prime Minister, which was designated for the rehabilitation of the war-ravaged
areas of northern Uganda, led donors to withdraw their budget support in
February. Donors, who fund about 25 percent of Uganda’s budget, demanded
repayment when the auditor general discovered the misappropriation of the
funds. The principal accountant in the Prime Minister’s Office was convicted of
abuse of office and forgery, but other officials implicated in the scandal were
never charged.
Police have silenced and obstructed activists working to raise corruption issues
and educate citizens about public sector accountability. Members of 50 civil
society groups have come together in solidarity and wear black every Monday
to raise awareness of corruption issues. Known as the Black Monday
Movement, the campaign publishes and distributes monthly newsletters that highlight the impact of corruption on various sectors, such as education and
health, and protests the impunity that government officials enjoy.
In the first 10 months of 2013, police arrested and charged at least 28 individuals
handing out Black Monday materials. Nineteen were charged with inciting
violence; five with possession of prohibited publications; and three with
spreading harmful propaganda. Most of the 28 were stopped from distributing
Black Monday materials and were detained for between three and ten hours by
police before being released without charge.
Illegal Arrest and Detention
The Ugandan government continues to grapple with the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) rebels based in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), a group
composed predominantly of Ugandan Muslims of the Salaf sect. In 2013,
Human Rights Watch documented over two dozen cases of illegal arrest and
detention of Salaf Muslims. Those arrested were detained for between one
week and four months, often moved to various detention locations, then
released without charge or brought before a court. Family members often could
not identify where their relatives had been detained, and police often denied
knowledge of the arrests.
Accountability for Past Abuses
In 2009 and 2011, police and military police killed at least 49 people, but police
have not conducted serious or meaningful investigations into these killings.
Relatives continue to search for justice through civil cases against the government.
The Uganda Human Rights Commission ordered compensation for two
families for the deaths of their children at the hands of security forces, but the
money was never paid. In December 2011, police disbanded its Rapid Response
Unit but there have been no investigations into the killings or torture by officers
in the unit. Similarly, no inquiries have been made by the Ugandan army into
cases of people who were tortured or died in the custody of the Joint Anti-
Terrorism Task Force (JATT).
The Lord’s Resistance Army
The Ugandan rebel group the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) was active across
the Central African Republic, southern Sudan, and northern Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), with allegations of killings and abductions, though on
a much lesser scale than previous years.
Warrants issued in 2005 by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for LRA leaders
remain outstanding. Former LRA fighter Thomas Kwoyelo, charged with willful
killing, taking hostages, and extensive destruction of property, has been
imprisoned in Uganda since March 2009 but his trial has not begun. The
Supreme Court has not yet heard the state’s 2012 appeal of the High Court ruling
ordering Kwoyelo to be granted amnesty and released.
In May, Uganda’s parliament reinstated legislation for another two years granting
amnesty to members of armed groups who surrender, though those wanted
on ICC warrants were explicitly not eligible. Sections of the Amnesty Act had
been allowed to lapse in May 2012, and through the new extension of the powers
of the Amnesty Commission, those who were not eligible during the interim
period now will now in theory qualify for amnesty.
Bills Violating Human Rights Law
The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the death penalty for some consensual
same-sex activities, and the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act,
which criminalizes intentional or attempted transmission of HIV, are before parliamentary
committees and could still be tabled for debate and vote at any
time. Both have been pending since 2009.
Key International Actors
Following the October 2012 US$12.7 million corruption scandal in the Office of
the Prime Minister, the governments of Denmark, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, and
the United Kingdom suspended budget support. Donors reported that the government
needed to take action to restore confidence before financial support
would resume. The World Bank suspended the ninth Poverty Reduction Support
Credit in December 2012 but eventually released it in June 2013. While the bank
will not proceed with the tenth, it indicated it is open to using budget support in exceptional cases to support governance or sectoral reforms. Since then,
most have turned to project support and reduced or stopped direct budget support.
For international development assistance to address corruption, Uganda’s
donors should significantly increase the focus on accountability at the highest
levels of government, and ensure that any reengagement is based on substantive
changes to Uganda’s anti-corruption structures. External donors should
also actively and vocally support civil society working to document and raise
awareness of corruption, by both financially supporting their work and publicly
denouncing arrests and harassment of activists.
International bilateral donors continue to press the government to respect lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) rights including pushing
police leadership to meet with LGBTI activists and improve communication and
response to threats to members of the LGBTI community.
In contrast, there continues to be minimal criticism of security force conduct,
such as the killings during protests in 2009 and 2011 and past and current torture
cases. The army continues to receive logistical support and training from
the US for counterterrorism, its leading role in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and counter-LRA operations in the Central African Republic
(CAR).