Uganda
Impunity, corruption, and the erosion of independent institutions obstruct the
protection of human rights in Uganda; government efforts in 2009 to tackle these
shortcomings were weak. With parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled
for early 2011, the ruling party faced increased criticism from the opposition
for failing to deliver electoral law reform or address the perceived partiality of the
Electoral Commission, voter disenfranchisement, and incumbents’ use of state
resources during campaigning.
Political tensions between the central government and the Buganda kingdom
exploded in violent demonstrations that rocked Kampala for two days in
September, leaving at least 27 dead. Members of the opposition and media faced
criminal charges for speaking before and after the events about the president’s
governance and the use of lethal force to quell rioters. No members of the security
forces were charged. The government forced four Luganda-language radio stations
off the air.
Extra-territorial military operations by Ugandan armed forces to defeat the longrunning
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) insurgency led to some LRA combatants
being captured. But civilians paid a heavy price in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC), southern Sudan, and the Central African Republic, the LRA killing
over 1,000 civilians and abducting hundreds across these three countries in
“revenge” attacks. Ugandan military operations have consistently failed to protect
civilians adequately, leaving hundreds of thousands displaced and without reliable
access to humanitarian aid.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Arbitrary Detention
During the September riots, those supporting the king of the Baganda blocked
roads and burned government property. Police and military fired live ammunition
at rioters, bystanders, and people hiding in their homes. The use of lethal force
by government forces drew criticism, but no one was held to account for the 27
deaths. Government officials blamed the media and the rioters for inciting violence.
Hundreds were arrested in police operations marked by brutality. Twenty three rioters who allegedly destroyed government property were charged with terrorism.
Separately, in 2009, Human Rights Watch documented unlawful arrests, illegal
detention, torture, and extrajudicial killing of alleged treason and terrorism suspects
by the Joint Anti Terrorism Task Force (JATT). The Ugandan armed forces and
parliament publicly committed to carrying out investigations, but no action has so
far been taken and reports of abuses continue.
Lawyers for five individuals “disappeared” by JATT filed habeas corpus petitions
in July. Human Rights Watch research had previously established that JATT had
held all five incommunicado for months without charge. The High Court ordered
that JATT produce the five before the court, but in defiance of the ruling the government
failed to produce the suspects and argued that they had recently reported
to the Amnesty Commission. The five were ultimately granted amnesty and
released, allegedly having admitted to rebel activity. The High Court questioned
the voluntariness of their confessions and requests for amnesty, and ruled that
the amnesty was unlawful because of their illegal detention.
In April and May government forces arrested 14 people in northern Uganda, mistreating
and detaining them without charge at the JATT headquarters for several
weeks. After a habeas petition was filed, the 14 were produced in court and
accused of membership in a previously unknown rebel group. All remain in custody
at this writing, charged with treason.
The minister of justice failed to address the legal status of 12 individuals who
were under age 18 when they committed crimes that qualify for the death penalty
if committed by an adult. The prisoners were convicted, but were given no sentence
and should have been placed in appropriate juvenile care. Some have been
held for over eight years while awaiting the minister’s orders. The ministry blamed
the courts for failing to turn over the appropriate reports.
Lord’s Resistance Army
Efforts to negotiate an end to the war between the LRA and the government
remained on hold after LRA leader Joseph Kony failed to sign an agreed peace
deal in 2008. While relative calm continued to prevail in northern Uganda, the LRA committed grave human rights abuses in the DRC, Central African Republic,
and southern Sudan. Some of the worst attacks took place in December 2008 and
January 2009 following the launch of Operation Lightning Thunder, a regional military
assault on the LRA in the DRC led by the Ugandan military. A Human Rights
Watch investigation documented how more than 865 civilians were killed and at
least 160 children were abducted during these attacks. When the Ugandan military
scaled back operations in March, civilian protection was largely left to the
Congolese army and United Nations peacekeepers, and LRA killings and abductions
of civilians continued in the DRC’s Orientale province. (See also DRC chapter.)
The Ugandan government took preliminary steps to establish a special division of
Uganda’s High Court to prosecute serious crimes in violation of international law,
as proposed during the LRA peace talks. Parliament introduced legislation to
domesticate the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Uganda and
establish the war crimes division.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
In August police beat and detained members of the opposition, Forum for
Democratic Change, who were demonstrating in Kampala against extensions of
office terms for the chairman and commissioners of the Electoral Commission,
despite accusations of election malpractice. Several demonstrators were arrested
and charged with organizing an illegal assembly. Throughout the year the police
tried to block peaceful demonstrations and assembly in several other parts of the
country.
The government’s clampdown on freedom of expression intensified in 2009,
especially after the September riots. Although the constitutionality of sedition
has been pending before the Constitutional Court since 2005, police continue to
use the charge to harass journalists and opposition leaders. Opposition members
Erias Lukwago and Medard Segona were charged with inciting violence and sedition
for statements made on a radio program. Unknown security operatives
arrested and beat prominent journalist Robert Kalundi Sserumaga after he criticized
the president’s upbringing on television; Sserumaga was charged with six
counts of sedition. By October at least 17 journalists had pending criminal charges against them for charges such as forgery, criminal defamation, sedition,
and promoting sectarianism. All are free on bail, awaiting trial.
Government officials told television stations to stop broadcasting live pictures of
the security forces’ response to the riots. In some instances, security agents
forcibly removed video footage from TV stations, and appropriated journalists’
cameras so they could delete images of dead bodies. Police also beat some journalists
who attempted to report on unfolding events, and some were detained
and interrogated for their coverage of the riots. President Yoweri Museveni
accused radio station CBS (part-owned by the Buganda kingdom) of running a
sustained campaign against his government, and through its regulatory body, the
Broadcasting Council, the government closed down CBS and three other radio
stations: they were accused of inciting violence and promoting sectarianism, but
had no notification or opportunity to appeal the Council’s decision. The Council
also banned a TV program and its host, and pressured some stations to dismiss
journalists who were critical of the government’s response to the riots.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
At least four people were arrested for alleged homosexual activity and charged
with either sodomy or “carnal knowledge against the order of nature.”
The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, tabled for discussion in parliament in October, prohibits
all homosexuality, making it punishable by a fine and a maximum prison
sentence of 10 years, or both. The bill further prohibits the “promotion” of homosexuality
through advocacy on sexual minority rights, threatening the activities of
any human rights group.
HIV/AIDS
Uganda’s draft HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill mandates HIV testing of pregnant
women, their partners, and other specified populations, and criminalizes
the intentional transmission (or attempted transmission) of HIV. In addition, the
bill grants health practitioners the power to notify sexual partners (and those “in
close and continuous contact”) of a person living with HIV of that person’s serostatus,
and criminalizes a wide range of conduct related to failure to follow medical orders or follow “safe procedures.” Arbitrary or selective enforcement of the
bill could restrict broad freedoms and undermine effective HIV prevention and
treatment approaches that rely upon outreach to and empowerment of affected
communities.
Key International Actors
Uganda’s aid donors privately expressed concern about ongoing cases of torture
and illegal detention by security forces, but did not speak out publicly to condemn
abuses.
Warrants issued by the International Criminal Court for LRA leaders in 2005
remain outstanding. The United States provided material and intelligence assistance
to the Uganda-led offensive in December 2008, but failed to adequately
provide or plan for civilian protection. In May 2009 members of the US Congress
introduced legislation requiring the Obama administration to develop a multilateral
strategy to apprehend LRA leaders; the legislation is currently under review.
Other actors—including the United Kingdom, the European Union, and the United
Nations—failed to take effective steps toward the apprehension of LRA leaders
under ICC warrant, although some expressed concern over ongoing LRA abuses.