 UKRAINE
 The Ukrainian Parliament's declaration of independence in August 1991 was rati-
 fied by a popular referendum on December 1, 1991, in which over 90 percent of
 those voting approved the Parliament's action, with 84 percent of eligible voters par-
 ticipating. In a presidential election held the same day, President Ienid Kravchuk
 won with over 61 percent of the vote. Both the referendum and the election were
 considered free anl fair.
 Ukraine is still governed by the 1978 Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic Con-
 stitution modified by the institution of the presidency and the introduction of a
 multiparty system. The Government is a parliamentary democracy with separate ex-
 ecutive, judicial and legislative branches. The President, elected for a 5-year term,
 nominates the Pirime Minister and members of the Cabinet, who are then subject
 to confirmation by the Parliament. The 450-member Parliament, called the Supreme
 Rada, is responsible for initiating legislation ratifying international treaties and
 agreements, and approving the state budget. iDay-to-day government operations are
 the responsibility of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. In February the Supreme
 Rada granted President Kravchuk extraordinary powers to appoint Presidential rep-
 resentatives to head oblast (provincial) and municipal governments to exert more
 centralized control over the implementation of economic and administrative reforms.
 Parliament also granted extraordinary powers to Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma
 until May 1993 to reform and regulate the economy. He may issue economic decrees
 which have the force of law unless vetoed by Parliament within 10 days. A par-
 liamentary commission was formed to prepare a new Ukrainian constitution which
 envisions a strong presidency, a bicameral legislature, and an independent judiciary.
 In January Ukraine began to establish its own armed forces from among the con-
 ventional troops and equipment formerly in the service of the Soviet Union. Ukrain-
 ian defense doctrine envisions a gradual demobilization of existing forces to person-
 nel levels consistent with Ukraine's defense needs. Security forces are under the
 President's control, and their activities are nominally subject to investigation by a
 permanent parliamentary commission.
 The Ukrainian economy showed only slight movement from a command-adminis-
 trative system toward a market-oriented one. Parliament adopted a privatization
 program for 1992-93 in July, but implementation is proceeding slowly. Production
 in state-owned industries has declined ra    but rivate economic activity, espe-
 cially in trade and services, is growing. Commercial and agricultural land may be
 leased for up to 99 years and the leases inherited by family members upon the les-
 see's death. The Cabinet is currently considering adoption of a decree that would
 allow private ownership of individual and garden plots. Citizens are allowed to par-
 ticipate in entrepreneurial activities and to engage in foreign economic activity after
 regstration with government authorities.
 Despite many bureaucratic obstacles, Ukraine made significant progress in the
 area of human rights during 1992. Transition from the old, centralized Communist
 system to open, effectively functioning democratic institutions and practices remains
 the major task. Since 1991 democratic reforms have included adoption of a
 multiparty system and legislative guarantees of basic civil and political rights for
 the national minorities.
 However a new constitution to replace the Soviet-era document has yet to be rati-
 fied, and tie ability of the legislature and judiciary to function independently from
 the executive branch remains limited. The November 1991 law on protection of na-
 tional minorities guarantees ethnic minority groups the right to schools and cultural
 facilities and the use of their respective languages in business and official cor-
 respondence, but ethnic tension, particularly in Crimea, still exists. Other problem
 areas include religious affairs, where violence accompanied the return to the various
 churches of property the Soviets had seized, freedom of expression, where the Gov-
 ernment has attempted to suppress criticism of its policies, searches of homes with-
 out warrant, and surveillance of individuals and communications.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No such killings are known to have
 occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported incidents of abductions or disappear-
 ances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by Ukrainian constitutional law. Police beatings occasionally
 have been reported. During student demonstrations in front of the Parliament build-
 
 
 952
 ing in October 1992, police reportedly beat several students and a foreign reporter
 severely.
 Ukraine's legacy of Communist rule is apparent in its penal system; prisons are
 still administer  under Soviet standards. While physical abuse of prisoners does
 not appear to be systematic, food and sanitary conditions are below Western stand-
 ards. In August members of a British human rights organization, who were per-
 mitted to visit a prisoner at the Volnyansk labor camp near Zaporozhye, reported
 that the prisoner was a victim of arbitrary punishment because he openly practiced
 his Jewish religion. Prison authorities reportedly deprived the prisoner of badly
 needed medicines and confined him to an isolation cell.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reported cases of arbitrary
 arrest or detention of persons on the basis of their religious or political convictions.
 A Ukrainian citizen, Alexander Fridson, claimed he was arrested (in 1972) because
 of his religious beliefs. Fridson's case was examined by the U.S.-Ukrainian Organi-
 zation for the Defense of Human Rights, which determined he was not a political
 prisoner.
 A person suspected of a crime may be detained by the police or an investigator.
 Investigators may work for the police, prosecutors, or the security forces. If a person
 is detained more than 3 days, the prosecutor must issue an arrest order which per-
 mits detention during the course of the criminal investigations before formal
 charges are filed with a court. Detention may not last longer than 3 months without
 charges being filed unless there is an order from the General Prosecutor of the Re-
 public. Even with such an order, detention may not extend longer than 6 months.
 Beginning in March, a new law permitted citizens to appeal the legality of an ar-
 rest either to the court or to the prosecutor. Increasingy such appeals are being
 filed with the courts as the practice under the new law takes effect. If detention
 exceeds the legal limits, superiors in the prosecutor's office or the investigator's of-
 fice can discipline the prosecutor. There have been individual cases in which pros-
 ecutors have 'been dismissed for not adheringto legal guidelines. In theory, courts
 can order a defendant released if detained ill egally. However, the court appellate
 process is still weakly developed, and this right is underutilized. There is no bail
 system, although once charges are filed the court may release the defendant on his
 own recognizance.
 A judge has less than 3 weeks from the time that charges are riled to initiate the
 trial. The law provides for access to a defense attorney from the moment of deten-
 tion or the filing of charges, whichever comes first. The prosecutor or investigator
 files investigative dossiers with the court. To protect the defendant, each investiga-
 tive file must contain a document signed by the defendant and his counsel attesting
 that the defendant's rights were explained to him in the presence of an attorney.
 An appeals court may dismiss a conviction or order a new trial if this document is
 missing.
 There has been increased use of these procedures as the new changes in criminal
 procedure take effect and defendants become aware of their new rights. However,
 people generally do not use these new procedures because they do not understand
 the system and because defense attorneys now charge high fees.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Ukrainian court system follows the Soviet
 model. Aside from a December 1991 law modifying the Ukrainian system of prosecu-
 tion and a June 1992 law creating a Constitutional Court, there has not yet been
 major structural reform. Parliament is reviewing draft legal reforms.
 The courts are organized on three levels: rayon courts, also known as o ple's
 courts; oblast (provincial) courts, divided into criminal and civil sections, th of
 which hear cases directly and handle a limited number of appeals from the rayon
 courts; and the Supreme Court which may hear very serious cases directly (e.g.,
 murder) and also handles appeals by prosecutors and defendants of lower court ver-
 dicts. Parliament is reviewing the functions and oranization of the Supreme Court.
 The division of labor between the Constitutional Curt and the Supreme Court as
 courts of last instance is not yet clear.
 There are no clear rules to determine what court first hears a case. Serious or
 politically sensitive cases are often first heard at the oblast level. For example, dis-
 puted claims over church propertyV between the Greek Catholic and Orthodox
 whurches have been referreddirectly to oblast courts, and appeals are taken to the
 General Prosecutor or the Supreme Court. Military tribunals ande cases involving
 military personnel only, as a rule.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are organized into offices at the rayon, oblast, and
 republic levels. They ultimately are responsible to the General Prosecutor whom
 Parliament appoints. A December 1991 law declares the prosecutor equal to the de-
 fense attorneycfore the courts.
 
 
 953
 Oblast and Supreme Court judges must have at least 5 years of legal experience
 and are selected by Parliament on the basis of the Ministry of Justice's rec.
 ommendations. These recommendations, in turn, are based in part on examination
 results. Judges are banned from being members of political parties. Many judges
 and prosecutors were appointed under the Communist system, when political influ-
 ence pervaded the judicial system. It is unclear whether the judiciary is free from
 influence and intimidation by the executive branch of government. At the provincial
 level especially, judges, prosecutors, and other court officials are closely attuned to
 local government interests. Ukraiman human rights monitors report that political
 influence still exists at the local court level. According to a U.S.-Ukrainian human
 rights organization, the assistant prosecutor in Mikolayiv Oblast was fired in March
 on false pretenses after attempting to expose corruption in the local government.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Intru-
 sive surveillance by the security service is permitted for reasons of national security.
 Security officials may search homes without a warrant. According to the security
 service charter, persons subject to surveillance must be informed after a months
 time. Over the past year, the security services have become more sensitized and
 have self-imposed restrictions on surveillance of individuals or communications. The
 Prosecutor General's office has oversight responsibility over the security services
 and is utilizing its authority to monitor their activities and to curb excesses by secu-
 rity officials. In the oblasts where incidents of wiretapping and mail surveillance
 have been reported, old-style bureaucrats still dominate security organs.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There is no Ukrainian law protecting freedom
 of speech and press. In August the President issued a warning that foreign critics
 of the Government (including journalists) could be deported within 24 hours. To
 date, no such action has been taken (see Section 4). The President clarified that the
 decree did not apply to accredited diplomats or journalists. However, a Ukrainian
 journalist, Mikola Knyazhivskiy, is under investigation for libel against the Presi-
 dent for giving a newspaper interview critical of the Government.
 Limited criticism of the Government is tolerated, but lack of funding for independ-
 ent media makes it difficult for opposition leaders to disseminate their views widely.
 Most newspapers receive state subsidies and faithfully reflect government policy.
 While no direct government censorship mechanism exists, official newspapers are
 reluctant to publish antigovernment editorials or information that may ofend the
 Government for fear of losing their subsidies. Independent newspapers face obsta.
 cles in publishing regularly, e.g., in obtaining newsprint from state outlets. Further-
 more, editions of ineen ent   riodicals were reported lost en route from printing
 presses to warehouses. Soyuzpechat, the state publication and distribution agency,
 reportedly broke contracts for disseminating independent newspapers in Ukraine.
 At the local level, oblast authorities often control which newspapers are to be sold
 as well as their distribution.
 State radio and television are censored. The Government restricts discussion of
 domestic politics in the broadcast media. For example there is currently an internal
 prohibition on reporting conflicts between churches. The State has given broadcast-
 ing time to some (nongovernment) commercial channels but restricted what they
 may broadcast.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The 1989 Ukrainian Soviet So-
 cialist Republic law on public assembly, which is still in force, stipulates that orga-
 nizations must apply to the respective local administration 10 days before a planned
 demonstration. Participants in demonstrations are prohibited by law from instigat.
 ing violence or ethnic conflict and from calling for the violent overthrow of the con-
 stitutional order. Demonstrations must not interfere with traffic or otherwise hinder
 municipal life. In Kiev, permits are routinely granted, and demonstrations take
 place almost daily at the Supreme Rada building while Parliament is in session. In
 1992 a numberof unsanctioned rallies and demonstrations took place in Kiev with-
 out police interference.
 The June 1992 law on public organizations prohibits the State from financing po-
 litical parties and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties
 may not receive funds from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. The law
 prohibits organizations advocating the violent overthrow of the government and'con-
 stitutional order or undermining Ukraine's state security by collaboration with other
 states. Political parties are barred from having administrative or organizational
 structures abroad. Members of police and the armed forces and executive branch of-
 ficials are prohibited from joining political parties. Parties may be dissolved only by
 a court decision. The only party that has been dissolved is the Communist Party
 of Ukraine, a subsidiary of the former Communist Party of the Soviet Union
 
 
 954
 (CPSU). However, the Communist Party has be allowed to re-form under the name
 Socialist Party of Ukraine. There have been no trials against ranking CPSU mem-
 bers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The April 1991 law on freedom of conscience and religion
 permits religious organizations to establish places of worship and train clergy. Reli.
 gious organizations are required to register with local authorities and with the Gov-
 ernment a Council of Religious Affairs. As a rule, the registration process lasts about
 1 month. The State has not interfered with the registration of minority religions
 (i.e., Islam, Mormons, Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Church of the Nazarene). Ob-
 stacles to complete religious freedom still exist at local levels, where the bureauc.
 racy reportedly has delayed registration of Greek Catholic or Orthodox parishes
 pending resolution of disputed claims over church property.
 Churches are permitted to maintain links with coreligonists in other countries.
 Religious publications are freely allowed. Greek Catholic, Orthodox, and Jewish
 services on major religious holidays are televised. Easter and Christmas were de-
 clared official holidays in 1991. Religious groups are allowed to proselytize and dis-
 tribute Bibles and other religious publications. Religious education classes are per-
 mitted in public schools as an extracurricular activity. The Greek Catholics and Or-
 thodox have seminaries. Jewish religious schools (yeshivas) are operating in Kiev,
 L'viv, Odessa, Kharkiv, and Vinnitsa.
 The dominant faiths are the Ukrainian Greek Catholic and the Orthodox. The lat-
 ter is divided over the issue of independence from the Russian Orthodox Church
 (ROC) and the Patriarch in Moscow. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC) retains
 its links to the ROC and recognizes the primacy of the Patriarch in Moscow. The
 Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC) is nationalist oriented and
 independent of Moscow. The former head of the UOC, Metropolitan Filaret, joined
 the UAOC. Filaret is second only to Patriarch Mystyslav in the UAOC hierarchy
 and is likely to succeed the Patriarch as head of the UAOC. The rift between ROC
 and UAOC involves the Government, which appears to side with the UAOC for po-
 litical reasons.
 Most claims of discrimination have been connected with the reapportionment of
 religious property seized by the Soviet State. Both the Greek Catholics and the UOC
 claim that the Government has given the UAOC preferential treatment, and violent
 clashes have accompanied the division of property. According to Greek Catholic au-
 thorities, UAOC members, often with the local authorities' tacit approval, beat
 Catholic clergy and laymen and disrupted services. Appeals to the President and the
 General Prosecutor to investigate these incidents have gone unanswered. Confronta-
 tions between Catholics and the UAOC diminished in the latter half of the year.
 However, violent incidents increased between supporters of the UOC and the
 UAOC, again with claims that the authorities were tacitly supporting the latter.
 There have been incidents of anti-Semitism among the population at large. Never-
 theless, Jews in Ukraine have had expanded opportunities to pursue their religious
 and cultural activities. In 1991-92, synagogues were restored to Jewish commu-
 nities in Khmelnitskiy and Dnepropetrovsk. The Jewish community in Vinnitsa
 opened a synagogue in rented quarters, but the local bureaucracy held up return
 of the traditional synagogue building.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Ukraine maintains the former Soviet law requiring its citizens to reg-
 ister with a local "Visas and Registration Office" (OVIR) to obtain employment or
 living quarters. The law remains in effect for quarters leased from the Government
 but apparently is not strictly applied. This practice does not restrict the movement
 of Ukrainians but does impose additional bureaucratic requirements.
 Most Ukrainians who wish to travel abroad, but not emigrate, obtain exit permis-
 sion, despite cumbersome bureaucratic requirements. Ukraine still has Soviet laws
 that require citizens to apply for a special foreign travel passport and an exit visa.
 Exit permission has been denied to a handful of individuals seeking to leave
 Ukraine for good, usually because the applicant allegedly possesses information
 deemed vital to Ukrainian national security. As a rule, reapplications are accepted
 every 6 months, but some applicants have been waiting for several years without
 a favorable resolution.
 Ukraine seems interested in assuring the right of return for all those it considers
 its citizens. In mid-1992 the Government issued a statement allowing all those born
 in Ukraine to receive a document from any Ukrainian diplomatic mission abroad
 that would serve as a travel document to Ukraine.
 
 
 955
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens To Change Their Gov-
 ernment
 The right to vote is granted to all adult citizens of Ukraine regardless of national-
 ity or sex. However, t e eaceful, democratic transfer of power from an incumbent
 government to an opposition arty has yet to be tested.
 Though elected in a fair election to a 5-year term in December 1991, President
 Kravchuk, formerly Chairman of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, depends on support
 in the old Communist party nomenklatura (ruling elite). He dominates the country's
 political life. Most recently, Parliament temporarily relinquished (until May 1993)
 its powers to the Prime Minister in a number of crucial areas, including monetary
 reform, taxation, privatization, regulation of state industries, and price liberaliza-
 tion.
 The political system is still evolving, and the relationship between the branches
 of government has yet to be codified. President Kravchuk has coopted much of the
 democratic opposition, largely by appealing to its poitical and economic nationalism.
 He has offered ambassadorial or ministernal positions to opposition politicians. Dur-
 ing 1992, at his behest, Parliament passed a law on "Presidential Representation"
 which gives him the authority to appoint a representative to each oblast. The law
 provides the representative with broad powers over local government and further
 concentrates political power in the executive branch.
 Parliament, the Supreme Rada, has relatively little democratic legitimacy and has
 not always served as an effective counterweight to the Presidency. The deputies to
 Parliament, as well as the members of the oblast councils, were elected to 5-year
 terms in 1990 before independence when the Communist party was still the domi-
 nant force in Ukrainian society. Except for western Ukrainian oblasts where can-
 didates from Rukh and other parties of the democratic opposition prevailed, most
 of the deputies to legislatures at both the national and local levels were conserv-
 atives drawn from the Communist party nomenklatura. After the attempted coup
 in Augst 1991, Communist party activity was suspended. A number of reform-
 minded Communist deputies formed new parties or joined forces with the opposi-
 tion. Hence, the Parliament is divided about equally between the conservatives and
 the opposition coalition of nationalists and reform-oriented deputies.
 New parliamentary elections were expected to be held after ratification of the new
 constitution, which had been foreseen in 1992. Both the elections and ratification
 of the constitution have now been delayed. Many deputies have criticized the draft
 constitution for giving the President too much authority, and the draft is currently
 under review by Parliament's Constitutional Committee. A coalition of democratic
 forces, including Rukh and a political alliance "New Ukraine," is pushing for new
 parliamentary elections as well as accelerated economic reform. They organized a
 signature campaign in favor of a popular referendum calling for new elections as
 early as the spring of 1993, but their campaign reportedly failed to obtain sufficient
 signatures. In October virtually all elements in Parliament united to force the res-
 ignation of Prime Minister Fokin, an old colleague of the President, for ineffective-
 ness. His replacement, Leonid Kuchma, a facto  mansgr with ties to reformers,
 has formed a more broadly based Government which includes opposition elements.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed local and international human rights grups to operate
 freely. In May the Union of Councils for Soviet Jews opene  a  ic  office, which
 local human rights activists staff. Human rights monitors were extremely critical
 of the President when he warned that foreign critics of the Government could be
 deported in 24 hours (see Section 2.a.) but did not react publicly. Many felt the
 statement Was directed as much against domestic political opponents and intellec-
 tuals as against Kravchuk's critics in the Ukrainian diaspora.
 The Government also welcomed visits by foreign human rights organizations. The
 US. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe was invited to observe the
 independence referendum and presidential elections. In August an American Jewish
 Committee delegation of educators held talks With the Ukrainian Ministrc of Edu-
 cation on developing a curriculum unit for Ukrainian schools on human rights and
 democratic pluralism.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other grounds is prohibited in the
 Constitution. Although a 1989 law promotes Ukrainian as the state language, the
 November 1991 law on the rights of national minorities allows individual citizens
 to use their respective nationa languages in conducting personal business. In areas
 where there are large Russian minorities (Crimea and eastern Ukraine), Russian is
 
 
 956
 
 permitted as a language of official correspondence alongside Ukrainian. Russian is
 recognized as the official language of Crimea.
 There were a few complaints of discrimination by the Russian minority, but there
 was no evidence of serious Russian-Ukrainian ethnic tension except in Crimea (see
 below). Some Russians complained about the increased use of Ukrainian (the official
 state language) in schools and in the media. However, little evidence of forced
 Ukrainization has been observed. in russophone areas, Russian remains the primary
 language of instruction and commerce, and laws and decrees are published in both
 Russian and Ukrainian. Polish, Hungarian, and other ethnic minorities have been
 granted sites for schools and cultural organizations.
 The Ukrainian citizenship law confers the same legal status on all citizens, re-
 gardless of ethnic affiliation. However, it does not recognize dual citizenship, unless
 specifically guaranteed by a bilateral treaty. In 1991 Parliament amended the citi-
 zenship law to remove notations in internal passports identifying citizens by eth-
 nicity or religion.
 In 1992 ethnic tensions were most pronounced in the Crimean peninsula, inhab-
 ited by 1.5 million Russians, 800,000 Ukrainians, and 150,000 Tatars, as well as
 by other nationalities. A number of pro-Russian political organizations, including
 the Russian Association of Crimea and the Republican Movement of Crimea (RDK)
 advocated secession of Crimea from Ukraine and annexation to Russia. Meanwhile,
 ethnic Ukrainian organizations in Crimea pressed for increased cultural and linguis-
 tic rights. Before 1992, there were no Ukrainian-language newspapers in Crimea.
 Local Russian-language broadcasts often preempt Ukrainian-language television
 programs.
 In 1992 the pro-Russian RDK spearheaded a signature campaign on Crimean se-
 cession from Ukraine. Although the required number of signatures was collected,
 the Crimean parliament voted in June to postpone the referendum issue indefinitely
 and to stipulate in the draft Crimean constitution that Crimea is an integral part
 of Ukraine. In July the Crimean and Ukrainian Parliaments agreed that in return
 for political, cultural, and economic autonomy Crimea would remain under Ukrain-
 ian territorial jurisdiction.
 The Crimean Tatars, who have been returning to Crimea over the past several
 years from Uzbekistan and other Central Asian republics to which they had been
 deported in 1944, encountered difficulties in acquiring adequate housing and other
 amenities. According to official statistics, about 150,000 Crimean Tatars are legally
 settled in Crimea; about 300,000 more wish to return. The Ukrainian Government
 allocated funds for Tatar resettlement, much of which remains unspent owing to in-
 adequate construction capacity. Crimean Tatar political leaders are pressing for
 guarantees of their ethnic rights and privileges in the future Crimean constitution.
 Tatar political leaders support the integrity of the Ukrainian State, and the Tatar
 vote was crucial for the passage of the Ukrainian independence referendum in Cri-
 mea.
 Jews are the second largest minority in Ukraine, although their numbers declined
 from about 630,000 in 1980 to less than 500,000 in 1992. Emigration to the West
 and Israel accounted for much of the decline. Jewish emigration reportedly in-
 creased at the beginning of the Ukrainian national revival (1990-91) as many Jews
 feared that an upsurge of Ukrainian nationalism would lead to anti-Semitic activity.
 To counter this fear, the Ukrainian Government and Rukh issued numerous state-
 ments denouncing anti-Semitism. In 1992 Ukraine established formal diplomatic re-
 lations with Israel and supported rescinding the United Nations anti-Zionist resolu-
 tion. Ukrainian official support for Jewish newspapers, schools, and Hebrew lan-
 guage and literature departments in universities as well as a state-sponsored com-
 memoration of the massacre at Babi Yar had much to do with the overwhelming
 Jewish vote supporting the independence referendum.
 Nevertheless, manifestations of anti-Semitism continue to occur. In February an
 American citizen rabbi in Kiev reported an arson attempt at his apartment. In
 March unknown persons set fire to the apartment of the Ukrainian-Jewish writer
 Abraham Katznelson and smeared anti-Semitic slogans outside his door. Local po-
 lice are investigating the incidents, but no one has been apprehended.
 There are some reports of violence against women, often involving the high inci-
 dence of alcoholism, but no statistics are available. Ukrainian labor law guarantees
 all work-related rights to women as well as men. Although equal pay for equal work
 is the law in Ukraine, women are not visible in high-level managerial positions.
 However, educational opportunities for women are improving, and more women are
 entering the legal, medical, and journalism professions.
 
 
 957
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Ri.ht of Association.-Until the end of 1991 Ukrainian labor unions were
 affiliated with the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions in Moscow. In 1992
 the official Ukrainian trade unions were named the Federation of Independent
 Trade Unions but later, in November dropped the word "independent." In some
 cases, the Federation of Trade Unions began to work independently of the Govern-
 ment and has been vocal in opposing draft legislation that would have restricted the
 right to strike. In 1992 many independent Ukrainian unions emerged and now pro.
 vide an alternative to the official unions in most sectors of the economy. Some such
 as the Independent Miners' Union of Ukraine (NPGU), emerged out of the Former
 U.SSR. independent unions. Independent unions were established in the Black Sea
 fleet, among the military officers of Ukraine, and among the scientific workers of
 the Academy of Sciences. In early 1992, the NPGU, the pilots, civil air dispatchers,
 locomotive engineers, and ground crew union formed the Consultative Council of
 Free Trade Unions. This entity acts independently of the Federation of Trade
 Unions. In negotiating wage deals, the Government has invited all unions, not just
 the Federation of Trade Unions, to participate.
 Soviet law, or pertinent parts of the 1978 Ukrainian Constitution, continue to reg-
 ulate the activities of trade unions. A new constitution and new law on trade unions
 are being debated, which will affect the future status and activities of trade unions.
 In principle all workers and civil servants (including members of the armed forces)
 are free to form unions. In practice, the Government discourages certain categories
 of workers (e.g., nuclear power plant employees) from doing so.
 The law on abor conflict resolution guarantees the right to strike to all but mem-
 bers of the armed forces, civil and security services, and employees of "continuing
 process plants" (e.g., metallurgical factories). The law prohibits strikes that "may in-
 fringe on the basic needs of the population" (e.g. rail and air transportation).
 Strikes based solely on political demands are considered illegal. However this did
 not stop miners and transportation workers from making political as well as eco-
 nomic demands during their September strike. Although the law forbids penalizing
 union members who participate in strikes some workers reportedly were threatened
 with wage cuts and demotions in the wake of the September transportation strike.
 All trade unions vociferously denounced a proposed law that would adlow only work-
 er collectives and not unions the right to strike.
 Ukraine is a longstanding member of the International Labor Organization. There
 are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with international trade
 union bodies; however, the lack of hard currency resources practically inhibits
 Ukrainian unions from joining such organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-In accordance with the law
 on enterprises, joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues con-
 cerning wages, working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the
 enterprise level. The division of responsibilities between the joint commissions and
 strucures (i.e., trade unions and the council of the enterprise) left over from the
 Soviet system are not clearly defined. Overlapping spheres of responsibility fre-
 .quently impede the collective bargaining process. The law on labor conflict resolu-
 tion introduced another bureaucracy, the National Mediation and Reconciliation
 Service, to mitigate labor-management disputes that cannot be resolved at the en-
 terrise level. The President appoints the head of this service.
 There are no export processing zones in Ukraine.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Ukrainian Constitution for-
 bids compulsory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 17. However, in certain nonhazardous industries, enterprises can negotiate with the
 Government to hire employees between 15 and 17 years of age. Education is compul-
 sory up to age 15. The Ministry of Education rigorously enforces the law on edu-
 cation.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In 1992 the Government established a country-
 wide minimum wage, which at the end of the year was significantly below the esti-
 mated cost of living. Wages in each industrial sector are established by government
 agreements with trade unions. All unions are invited to participate in these negotia-
 tions. The current law on wages, pensions, and social security provide for mecha-
 nisms to index the minimum wage to inflation.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 41-hour workweek and mandates at
 least 1 uninterrupted rest period lasting 42 hours each week. In addition, the law
 provides for at least 15 workdays of vacation per year. Economic stagnation in some
 industries (e.g., defense) have significantly reduced the workweek for some cat-
 egories of workers. Gross undercompensation for overtime work in some sectors
 (e.g., railroad workers) was one of the causes of the September transportation strike.
 
 
 958
 The Ukrainian Constitution and other laws contain occupational safety and health
 standards, but these are frequently ignored in practice. Lax safety conditions were
 the principal causes of two serious mine accidents that occurred in the summer of
 1992, resulting in dozens of casualties. The Labor Ministry is currently rewriting
 the Mine Safety Law. The NPGU is demanding that the Government improve work-
 er safety in the mines.
