 UKRAINE
 Under the new Ukrainian Constitution adopted in 1996 the President, elected for
 a 5-year term, and a one-chamber Parliament (the Rada), elected for a 4-year term,
 share responsibility for governance. (Transitional provisions continue the current
 President's and Parliament's terms until October 1999, and March 1998, respec-
 tively.) President Leonid Kuchma was elected in 1994. The President appoints the
 Cabinet and controls government operations. Under the new Constitution the judici-
 ary is funded as an independent branch, instead of through the Ministry of Justice.
 However, the court system remains subject to political interference.
 The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the
 Ministry of Defense all have equal status and report to the President through the
 Cabinet. The heads of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defense
 sit in the Cabinet of Ministers. In April the President established by decree the Na-
 tional Bureau of Investigation (NBI). However, the NBI had not been fully orga-
 nized by year's end; the Parliament refused to provide any funding for the NBI,
 pending the adoption a law formally establishing it. The chairmen of the SBU and
 the newly created NBI are also members of the Cabinet, but they are not cabinet
 ministers. The armed forces have largely remained outside politics. Although the
 SBU has not interfered in the poitic alp rocess, it can affect it through criminal in-
 vestigations against politicians and influential businessmen. Reportedly, the Gov-
 ernment has used government agencies, especially the Tax Inspectorate, to disrupt
 or eliminate the businesses of competitors and political opponents. Despite the Gov-
 ernment's adoption of a sweeping anti-corruption program, the SBU, police, and
 Prosecutor's Office have drawn domestic and international criticism for their failure
 to take adequate action to curb institutional corruption and abuse in the Govern-
 ment. Many high profile corruption cases, which were opened earlier, have been
 dropped, ostensibly because of lack of incriminating evidence. Members of the secu-
 rity forces committed human rights abuses.
 . Ukraine is making a difficult transition from central planning to a market-based
 economy. According to official statistics, about half of the work force is formally em-
 ployed in manufacturing, with the balance divided between services and agriculture,
 
 
 1361
 although in reality many industrial enterprises have reduced or stopped production.
 Exports are diversified and include metals, chemicals, sugar, and semi-finished
 goods. Annual per capita gss domesticproduct for 1997 was approximately $1,000.
 In 1996 Ukraine achieved a measure of macroeconomic stability for the first time
 since independence. Inflation, which at times had accelerated to hyperinflation, was
 10 percent for 1997. The private sector has grown significantly and now represents
 a substantial portion of the economy, although growth in the unofficial shadow econ-
 omy is not fully reflected in official government statistics. Nevertheless, the country
 remains in a serious economic crisis. Industrial output continues to decline, and
 shrinking revenue has left millions of employees unpaid for many months. The pace
 of reform was erratic during the year, particularly in the agricultural sector. Despite
 some progress on privatization and deregulation, investment remains at low levels,
 with many potential investors discouraged by onerous and arbitrary taxation and
 licensing practices.
 Overall, Ukraine continued the process of building a law-based civil society. Re-
 ports of human rights violations remained at the same low level as in 1996. Prob-
 lens continue in the unreformed legal and prison systems, and the army. Police and
 prison officials regularly beat detainees and prisoners; beating of conscripts is com-
 mon in the army. The Government rarely punishes officials who commit such
 abuses. Prison conditions remain poor, andlengthy pretrial detention under poor
 conditions is a common problem. The judiciary is overburdened and lacks sufficient
 funding and-staff. Long delays in trials are a problem. While progress has been
 made toward ensuring the independence of the judiciary, political interference con-
 tinues to affect the judicial process. There are occasional government attempts to
 control the press and limit freedom of speech, and significant limits on freedom of
 association and on nonnative religious organizations. Laws governing political party
 organizations have the potential to limit human rights. Significant societal anti-
 Semitism, violence against women and children, as well as discrimination against
 women, and both ethnic and religious minorities, persist.
 The efficacy of the 1996 Constitution and the safeguards that it provides for
 human rights depends on enabling legislation, most of which has not yet been
 passed. The power of the Constitutional Court remains untested. The Constitution's
 provision for a human rights ombudsman appointed by Parliament to assist citizens
 in defending their rights was first adopted on November 13. On December 5 the
 President vetoed the law, giving his requirements that the Ombudsman should not
 be a member of any political party and that he should be a professional lawyer.
 However, subsequently the Parliament incorporated most of the presidential propos-
 als into the new version and adopted the law on December 23. (The President
 signed the bill into law on January 10, 1998.)
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by government agents. In some instances the line between politically moti-
 vated killing and criminal activities was difficult to distinguish. The Government's
 inability to stem economic decline and check the growth of violent, organized crimi-
 nal activity had-major repercussions. Politicians and politically-connected business-
 men continued to be the victims-whether through killing or kidnaping-of orga-
 nized criminal groups, aided in a few cases, either actively or passively, by corrupt
 officials.
 During the year a member of the town-council in Yevpatoriya, the regional prop-
 erty board director, and a governor in Razoolnensky district were killed. Police dis-
 covered that the governors murder was ordered by the chairman of the district
 council's law and order commission. In April a director of the large steel plant in
 Olchivsk, Donetsk Oblast, narrowly avoided a bomb explosion in his hotel room. The
 mayor of Odesa claimed that gunmen, who were overpowered by police in an apart-
 ment facing the city hall in August, had planned to kill him.
 The number of contract killings of members of the business community, often
 managers of state-owned enterprises, remained high, especially in the Crimea and
 Donetsk regions. Politicians were also targeted because of their influence over state-
 owned enterprises. In September the Crimean Deputy Minister for Tourism and Re-
 sorts was killed by a gunman. In December Arkadiy Tabachnyk of Odesa, a promi-
 nent businessman with very high political connections, and his bodyguard were also
 killed by a gunman. Also in December a bomb killed one nurse and injured several
 other persons in the intensive care unit of a hospital in Simferopol in an assassina-
 tion attempt on a local Crimean businessman with criminal connections. There have
 
 
 1362
 
 been no arrests in these cases. As of August there were 73 contract murders; in all
 of 1996 there were 157 contract murders.
 Pervasive organized crime and contract killings have been particularly rampant
 in the Donetsk region and Crimea. The undermining of governmental authority was
 Farticularly serious in Crimea. The Kiev central government in many matters exerts
 ittle institutional control over the peninsula, and the Crimean authorities, includ-
 ing members of the executive bodies and the legislature, are widely alleged to be
 compromised by ties to organized criminal elements. According to police reports, 51
 local council deputies are linked to the organized criminal groups, including 11 of
 49 members of the city council in Simferopol. Four local deputies were killed last
 year. The Prosecutor's Office opened five criminal cases against local deputies, in-
 cluding a member of the Crimean legislature. While recognizing the worsening
 crime scene, in 1996 the new Crimean police leadership claimed to have solved 18
 of 36 contract murders and to have detained over 109 criminal leaders, with some
 30 more detained in 1997. However, police leadership complains that loopholes in
 the existing criminal law allow criminal leaders to evade punishment in most cases.
 In 1996 some 1,000 Crimean policemen, including senior officers, were fired, and
 over 1000 were disciplined.
 The 1996 alleged assassination attempt on the then-prime minister, Pavlo
 Lazarenko, whose car reportedly barely escaped a bomb explosion, and the killing
 of Rada deputy and business magnate, Yevhen Scherban, remain unsolved. The
 1996 attempt on the mayor of Sevastopol remains unresolved.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The alleged kidnaping in 1996 of the former speaker of the Crimean legislature
 remains unsolved.
 The January 1994 disappearance of Myhailo Boichyshyn, a prominent leader of
 the Popular Movement of Ukraine (RUKH?), remains unsolved.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture; however, police and prison officials regularly
 beat detainees and prisoners. Amnesty International in Ukraine reports that riot po-
 lice beat and torture prisoners during their regular training exercises at jails. In
 1996 the human rights group reported about 20 examples of such mistreatment.
 There is no effective mechanism for registering complaints about mistreatment or
 for obtaining redress. The human rights ombudsman required by the new Constitu-
 tion may provide such a mechanism once it is established. The Government made
 no known efforts during the year to end the practice or to punish officials who com-
 mitted or abetted such abuses. However, after the 1996 death of a suspect in the
 Security Service detention center (SBU) in Lviv, who was allegedly beaten to death
 by guards, the SBU leadership closed the facility and fired 36 of its 49 personnel.
 There were no developments in the case of a member of Parliament from Kiev,
 Myroslav Horbatyuk (who was placed in an intensive care unit after a brutal as-
 sault), and a former parliamentarian from Zaporizhzhia, Victor Slesarenko (whose
 car was blown up). They had claimed that violent attacks against them were linked
 to their investigations into high-level corruption in the Government. The Govern-
 ment has not yet announced the results of its investigations of these allegations.
 Beating of recruits by senior conscripts, sometimes resulting in death or suicide
 of the young soldiers, remains common in the army, especially in the notoriously
 violent penal units. Police corruption remains a serious problem.
 Conditions in pretrial detention facilities routinely fail to meet minimum inter-
 national standards. Inmates are sometimes held in investigative isolation for ex-
 tended periods and subjected to intimidation and mistreatment by jail guards and
 other inmates. Overcrowding is common in the pretrial and investigative detention
 centers. Prison overcrowding led the Government to release over 20,000 convicts
 under a mass amnesty, including some convicted of serious, violent crime.
 Prison conditions are poor. Despite government efforts to maintain minimum
 international standards in the prisons for convicted prisoners, the worsening eco-
 nomic situation led to a further deterioration of these facilities. Overcrowding, poor
 sanitation, and inadequate medical care are all common problems in the prisons.
 The incidence of murders by inmates and forced suicides in prisons is reportedly
 high. In 1996 there were 84 suicides in jails. No official statistics for prison murders
 are available.
 The Government generally permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that authorities may
 detain a person suspected of a crime for 3 days without a warrant. The Constitution
 provides that only the courts may issue arrest warrants, but under its transitional
 provisions the Prosecutor's Office retains the authority to issue arrest and search
 warrants until 2001. An arrest order must be issued if the period of detention ex-
 ceeds 3 days. The maximum period of detention after charges have been filed is 18
 
 
 1363
 
 months, but the law does not limit the aggregate time of detention before and dur-
 ing the trial. The law permits citizens to contest an arrest in court or appeal to the
 prosecutor.
 By law a trial must begin no later than 3 weeks after the defendant is indicted.
 This requirement is frequently not met by the overburdened court system, where
 months may pass before a defendant is finally brought to trial.
 The law stipulates that a defense attorney be provided without charge to the indi-
 gent from the moment of detention or the filing of charges, whichever comes first.
 There are insuffcientnumbers of defense attorneys to protect suspects from unlaw-
 ful, lengthy imprisonment under extremely poor conditions. Although the concept of
 providing attorneys from the state system remains in principle, public attorneys
 often refuse to defend indigents for the low government fee. While in custody a sus-
 pect or a prisoner is allowed by law to talk with a lawyer in private; however,
 human rights groups report that the client-attorney privilege is occasionally denied
 by prison or investigative officials. To protect the defendant each investigative file
 must contain a document signed by the defendant attesting that the charges against
 him, his iight to an attorney, and his right not to give evidence against himself or
 his relatives, have been explained to him,. An appeals court may dismiss a convic-
 tion or order a new trial if this document is missing. As defendants increasingly be-
 came aware of their rights, they insistedon observance of these procedures. How-
 ever, many persons still were unaware of these safeguards.
 Exile as a punishment no longer exists in the law, and the Government observes
 this prohibition.
 According to 1996 Interior Ministry statistics, of a total prison population of
 223,000 persons, approximately 45,000 were held in pretrial detention.
 There were no reports of political detainees.
 A group of Parliamentarians described as political persecution the detention and
 prosecution on criminal charges of hooliganism of a Parliamentary aide and member
 of the Ukrainian Radical Nationalist Group, UNA-UNSO, who wrote graffiti criticiz-
 ing Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko during his 1997 visit to Kiev.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Constitution provides for the establishment
 of an independent judiciary; however, the judiciary remains subject-to political inter-
 ference.
 -The existing court system is divided into courts of general jurisdiction and arbi-
 tration, or commercial, -courts. The courts of general jurisdiction are divided into
 criminal and civil sections..The-courts are organized on three levels: rayon (district
 or people's) courts,oblast (regional) courts, and the Supreme Court. There are 742
 district and city courts, 27 regional courts, 26 military courts and one interregional
 court. 'All may act as a court of first:instance-depending on the' nature and serious-
 ness of the crime. A case heard in the first instance~by the Supreme Court, there-
 fore, may not be appealed or overruled. Military- courts only handle cases involving
 military personnel.
 There are no clear rules to determine which court first hears a case.
 'The 1996 Constitution provides for a restructuring of the judiciary. Justice is to
 be administered by the Constitutional Court and general jurisdiction courts with the
 Supreme Court at their head. The judicial system is also to include local and ap-
 peals courts, as well as special courts to be established by future legislation, headed
 by their respective highest courts. However, pending formation of the new judicial
 system,-the old system-remains in place, including the present Supreme and Su-
 preme Arbitration Court, for a maximum period of 5 years, until 2001.
 The Parliament, the President, and-the Congress of Judges each appoint 6 of the
 Constitutional Court's 18 members for 9-year-terms. The Court Chairman is elected
 for a 3-year term by the 18 justices fronr among their own ranks. As of September,
 all positions on the court were filled. The Constitutional Court is the ultimate inter-
 preter of legislation and the Constitution. It determines the constitutionality of leg-
 islation, of presidential edicts, of cabinet acts, and of acts of the Crimean Autono-
 mous Republic. The -Constitutional Court hears cases at the request of the Presi-
 dent, at least 45 Parliamentarians, the Supreme Court, the Parliament's Human
 Rights Ombudsman, or the Crimean legislature. While-under the Constitution a citi-
 zen has the right to apply to any court, citizens can apply to the Constitutional
 court only through the Human Rights Ombudsman.
 The-Constitution strengthens the courts by establishing the principle of judicial
 review. During the first half of the year, citizens' filed over 6,000 civil suits against
 the Government, compared with 8,000. suits in 1996.-Most of these cases were dis-
 putes over unpaid wages. According to the Supreme Court, citizens win most such
 cases, although virtually no verdicts are enforced.
 The Criminal Procedures Code allows the following officials to suspend court deci-
 sions: Prosecutor General (or his Deputies), Head of the Supreme Court (or his dep-
 
 
 1364
 uties), and heads of the regional courts and Kiev municipal court (or their deputies).
 Such suspension is subject to the approval by the presidium of the regional court
 (respectively, Kiev municipal court and Supreme Court). It is believed that this sys-
 tem induces interference, manipulation and corruption.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are also organized into offices at the rayon, oblast,
 and republic levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General, who
 is appointed by the President and onfirmed by the Parliament for a 5-year term.
 Regional and district prosecutors are appointed by the Prosecutor General. Prosecu-
 tors and defense attorneys by law have equal status before the courts. In practice,
 however, prosecutors still are very influential because court proceedings are not con-
 ducted in an adversarial manner and the procuracy, in its pretrial investigative
 function, often acts in effect as a grand jury. A prosecutor directs all investigations
 of the Ministry of Internal affairs and the SBU, or he may use the investigative re-
 sources of his office. The Constitution considerably curtails the prosecutor's author-
 ity, limiting it to rosecution, representing the public interest in court, oversight of
 investigations, and implementation of court decisions. However, the transitional pro-
 visions of the Constitution allow the Prosecutor's Office to continue to conduct inves-
 tigations and oversee general observance of the law, pending the formation of the
 new pretrial investigation system. In November the Constitutional Court inter-
 preted the Procuracy Law, ruling that citizens can dispute prosecutors' decisions in
 court.
 Judges are appointed by the President for an initial 5-year term, after which they
 are subject to parliamentary approval for lifetime tenure. In accordance with the
 Constitution, the Parliament began appointing judges to lifetime tenure positions,
 reappointing most currently serving judges, with few exceptions. The Parliament
 awarded lifetime tenure to 433 of the 4,719 judges whose terms were due to expire
 in 1997. Over 350 of 389 judges of the arbitration (commercial) courts already had
 lifetime tenure under the 1991 Arbitration Court Law. Judges are recommended for
 nomination by local qualification commissions to the Supreme Qualification Com-
 mission. Judges are selected for nomination or dismissal by the Supreme Judicial
 Council, which is also authorized to discipline judges-including judges of the Su-
 preme Court and Supreme Special Courts-and prosecutors for violations of the law.
 The Supreme Judicial Council consists of 20 members nominated by the three
 branches of government and by professional associations from the law and procuracy
 sectors. It also includes the Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice,
 and the Prosecutor General of Ukraine. The press reported only one case of a judge
 being convicted for bribery. The Luhansk regional court gave a suspended sentence
 of 4 years to a judge in the town of Kasnodon for accepting a bribe of $1,000. The
 Supreme Court upheld the sentence.
 Many judges and prosecutors were appointed during the Soviet era, when political
 influence pervaded the criminal justice system. Human rights lawyers claim that
 the judiciary is not free from government influence, particularly at the regional and
 local levels. Judges, prosecutors, and other court officials appear to remain closely
 attuned to local government interests. Organized crime elements are also widely al-
 leged to influence court decisions. Although statistics are not available, the Justice
 Ministry reports that this year some ju ges have been disciplined and dismissed.
 However, since independence only four judges have been prosecuted on criminal
 charges for bribery, with no such cases resulting in a trial. No higher court judge
 has been disciplined to date. Criminal elements routinely use intimidation to induce
 victims and witnesses to withdraw or change their testimony. The law requires that
 a special police unit protect judges, witnesses, defendants, and their relatives. How-
 ever, it has not yet been formed, and trial participants are vulnerable to pressure.
 Human rights groups contend that judicial processes are sometimes affected by
 the biases of expert advisers, who answer to government investigative and prosecu-
 torial bodies.
 The judiciary is inefficient and lacks sufficient staff and funds. The funds ear-
 marked for the judiciary in the budget are barely enough to pay the judges and the
 staff of the courts. According to the Justice Ministry, some 37 percent of the courts
 are inadequately housed. The authority of the judicial system is also undermined
 by a poor record of compliance with court decisions in civil and economic cases,
 while the provisions for criminal punishment under the criminal code for noncompli-
 ance with a court decision are rarely used.
 The 1993 In July the Cabinet decided to form police protection units to provide
 security for judges, defendants and their relatives.
 Under the existing court system, cases are decided by judges who sit singly (in
 principle with two public assessors), or in groups of three for more serious cases.
 As it has become increasingly difficult to find un aid public assessors willing to at-
 tend a trial, most cases are tried by a single judge. The Constitution provides for
 
 
 1365
 public, adversarial trials, including a judge (or Irup of judges), public assessors,
 state prosecutor, defense and jury (if required by the law).
 The Constitution includes procedural provisions to ensure a fair trial, including
 the right of a suspect or witness to refuse to testify against himself or his relatives.
 However, pending passage of legislation to implement the Constitution's provisions,
 a largely Soviet-era criminal justice system remains in. place. While the defendant
 is presumed innocent,.conviction rates -have changed little since the Soviet era.
 Nearly all completed cases result in convictions. Judges frequently send cases un-
 likely to end in convictions back to the-Prosecutor's Office for '!additional investiga-
 tion. Such cases may then be -dropped or closed. It is commonly believed that sus-
 pects frequently bribe court" officials to drop charges before cases go to trial, or to
 lessen or commute a sentence. Consequently, conviction rates are somewhat mis-
 leading. However, as courts have become more independent, the number of acquit-
 tals has increased each year. In May the Supreme Court Chairman made an unprec-
 edented public warning to investigative agencies, particularly, the police, against
 interfering in court decisions.
 Complicated cases can take years to go to trial. In the interim, defendants wait
 in pretrial detention. The 1996 Amendment to the Criminal Procedures Code pro-
 vides for bail, but to date it rarely has been used.
 According to Interior Ministry statistics, in comparison with past years, greater
 numbers of convicted defendants are receiving some form of suspended sentence, in
 large .part due to prison overcrowding. In 1996 about -138,000 persons received sus-
 pended sentences, while the prison population numbered approximately 223,000.
 Current members of Parliament, members of local councils, and judges enjoy im-
 munity from criminal prosecution unless the Parliament, the respective council, or
 the judiciary authority gives its consent to criminal proceedings. Consent is rarely
 given in practice.
 There were no :reports of political prisoners. A human rights group in
 Zaporizhzhya called Justice reported that its activist Stepan Shkarun was detained
 during the summer on-charges of insulting a judge while attempting to expose cor-
 ruption in the regional court. He alleged that the head of the regional court illegally
 received free gas from a haulage company in exchange for a favorable court ruling
 in a case involving the company's director. A human rights group claims that while
 he was in pre-trial detention in Dnipropetrovsk, Shkarun was beaten into signing
 a confession; he was released under amnesty a month later.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though the Constitution requires that courts issue search warrants, this provision
 has not yet been implemented. During the transition period, prosecutors are issuing
 search warrants. The SBU, for reasons of national security, may conduct intrusive
 surveillance and searches without a warrant with the consent of the Prosecutor
 General. The Prosecutor General's Office oversees the SBU, but the extent to which
 it utilizes that authority to monitor SBU activities and to curb excesses by security
 officials is unknown. The Constitution provides citizens with the right to examine
 any dossier that the SBU has on them and to sue for physical or emotional damages
 incurred by an investigation. The procedure to implement and enforce this new right
 have not yet been established.
 The remnants of Soviet control mechanisms survive in many guises. Militia per-
 sonnel have the right to stop vehicles arbitrarily and need no probable cause to ini-
 tiate extensive document checks and inspection of all parts of the vehicle. Citizens
 who have committed no violation, or only a minor one, often prefer to pay a bribe
 to avoid a time-consuming inspection. Police have the right to detain a person for
 up to 3 hours to verify identity. All internal passports contain a stamp indicating
 a citizen's residence and matrimonial status.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution and a 1991 law provide for
 freedom of speech and of the press; however, the Government persistently attempts
 to control the press. The Government tolerates criticism on a selective basis. Many
 journalists practice self-censorship. The Government largely controls the broadcast
 media.
 The print media, both independent and government-supported, demonstrate a
 tendency towards self-censorship on matters sensitive to the Government although
 this has been decreasing over time. The executive branch, through the Ministry of
 Press and Information, subsidizes the operations of some large-scale publications.
 The Ministry has warned some periodicals against fomenting ethnic tensions and
 conducting antistate propaganda and has applied to the Prosecutor's Office to open
 investigations into those newspapers. However, no newspapers are known to have
 been prosecuted as a result. Private newspapers have also been established and are
 
 
 1366
 free to function on a purely commercial basis. However, they practice self-censorship
 and are subject to various pressures such as control of access to affordable state-
 subsidized newsprint; dependence on political patrons who may facilitate financial
 support from the State Press Support Fund; close scrutiny from government offi-
 cials, especially at the local level; and politically motivated visits by tax inspectors.
 In April the President issued a decree on support of the press that requires the Cab-
 inet to draw up a list of publications needing government support, including those
 whose founders include central and local governments, public organizations, associa-
 tions, unions, educational institutions, and newspaper employees. The journalistic
 community believes that this decree was intended to support loyal members of the
 press. The dependence of the subsidized and private press on the Government's pa-
 tronage particularly inhibited criticism of the Government on the local level. For-
 eign-owned newspapers are permitted and foreign periodicals circulate freely.
 The broadcast media remain largely under state ownership. They are managed by
 the State Committee on Television and Radio (Derzhteleradio), whose head, accord-
 ing to the new Constitution, is appointed by the President and confirmed by Par-
 liament. The President and the Parliament each appoint half of the members to the
 regulatory board for broadcasting, the National Counci for Television and Radio
 Broadcasting, which issues broadcasting licenses and allocates broadcasting time.
 The law entitles private and foreign companies to establish and operate their own
 transmission facilities, provided that they obtain a license from the National Coun-
 cil. A news program that covers domestic political developments, notably Vikna
 (Windows) has fended off attempts by Derzhteleradio to preview and revise the con-
 tent of their programs. In April allegedly under pressure from the parliamentary
 leadership, the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council ordered the
 state-owned channel UT-2 to suspend the broadcasting of Pislyamova after it broad-
 cast a report that was critical of the Communist regime in Cuba at the time of a
 Ukrainian parliamentary delegation's trip to Cuba. The program was suspended but
 was permitted to resume broadcasting a short time later, after public protests and
 the intervention of the President. In December, citing increasing political pressure,
 Pislyamova decided to cease broadcasting for the election period.
 The Committee for Protection of State Secrets enjoys broadly defined powers over
 all media. According to journalists, it has not interfered with the practice of their
 craft. There is a comprehensive, specific regulation on state secrets whose publica-
 tion is prohibited. In May the Cabinet adopted a regulation that further defined
 state secrets to include information on executions, the state of prisons, pretrial de-
 tention blocks, and centers for the forcible treatment of alcoholics. Article 125 of the
 Criminal Code prescribes imprisonment of up to 5 years for libel. There is no known
 separate regulation regarding public officials (except for the President). A criminal
 case was opened against Crimean journalist Tatyana Korobova on charges of libel-
 ing Crimean parliamentarian Lev Mirimskiy who objected to her writing about his
 criminal connections. Article 7 of the Civil Code allows anyone, including public offi-
 cials, to sue for damages if circulated information, including a publication, is untrue
 or if it insults a person's honor or dignity. Journalists complain that the law is bi-
 ased against them because it does not limit damages.
 An editor of the newspaper Opositsiya, Ivan Makar, was given a 2-year suspended
 sentence in 1996 for libeling the President and his staff. Athough he appealed the
 court decision, this year the higher court confirmed the sentence. The newspaper
 was closed by order of a Kiev court for publishing caricatures of the President and
 his staff. Its equipment was confiscated.
 Reporting on organized crime and corruption in the Government, including mis-
 conduct by selected high-ranking cabinet and administration officials, is becoming
 increasingly bold. Journalists contend that they have been subjected to threats, in-
 cluding the threat of arrest, and violent assaults for aggressively reporting on crime
 and oficial corruption.
 The journalistic community links the deaths of two prominent journalists to their
 Sournalistic investigations. In March a Kievskiye Vedomosti corespondent from
 Luhansk, Petro Shevchenko, was found hanged at a remote water heating facility
 in Kiev shortly after he arrived in Kiev to visit the paper's headquarters. In August
 in Odesa the editor of the newspaper Vechernaya Odesa was shot and killed on his
 way to work by a gunman; the editor's assailant was arrested later by police. Jour-
 nalists believe that a large percentage of the 42 crimes committed against the press
 community in 1996 and the first half of 1997 was linked to their professional activi-
 ties. A number of correspondents claim that they were beaten up or threatened in
 retaliation for their critical publications. Following parliamentary hearings on free-
 dom of speech in April, police authorities pledged to better protect journalists.
 Journalists complain that the vaguely worded libel and defamation article of the
 Criminal Code is biased against the press, because it sets no limit on damages for
 
 
 1367
 libel or defamation. The popular newspaper Kiyevskiye Vedonosti was ordered to
 pay the metropolitan authorities over $400,000 (750,000 hryvnas) for an allegedly
 libelous article about the mayor of Kiev. A libel case was opened against a journalist
 in Crimea for writing about the criminal connections of a member of the Crimean
 legislature, although she presented the police with documents in support of her alle-
 gations. The case was dropped only after the local journalistic community appealed
 to the President. In June police confiscated equipment of the Vecherniy Sevastopol
 newspaper in Crimea after it accused the local mayor of corruption and criticized
 the city court. The editor of the paper was sentenced to 10 days in jail for refusing
 to publish an apology, but was released after journalists' protests. An owner of the
 popular newspaper Kiyevskiye Vedonosti claimed that unremitting investigations by
 law enforcement agencies, including tax police inspectors, into his concern's oper-
 ations were linked to the newspaper's reports about alleged abuse of office by the
 Minister of Internal Affairs and chief of staff of the presidential administration.
 The newspaper Region complained of massive, politically-motivated tax police in-
 vestigations in March and April, following the pu lication of an article accusing the
 then- rime Minister of establishing a monopoly on supplies of natural gas to
 Ukraine.
 In April the Cabinet of Ministers instructed the Finance Ministry to launch a
 sweeping inspection into private, nongovernmental media activities, including doz-
 ens of newspaper, television, radio and publishing companies. The inspection was
 canceled after protests by the public and the Parliament.
 In February a group of parliamentarians protested against the Rada secretariat's
 refusal to give accreditation to two correspondents of the newspaper Ukrayina
 Moloda, which was known for its critical reports about the Parliament. In June the
 Parliamentary press service stripped a commentator of the television program "Ac-
 cents" of his parliamentary accreditation because of his allegedly criticaI remarks
 about the Parliament and its leadership.
 While major universities are state owned, they ostensibly operate under full au-
 tonomy. Academic freedom within universities, however, is an underdeveloped and
 poorly understood concept. Nepotism and bribery are reportedly common during en-
 trance exams. Administrators of universities and many academic and research insti-
 tutions possess the power to silence professors and scientists with whom they dis-
 agree by denying them the possibility to publish, or more directly by withholding
 pahousing bonefits, or by terminating their appointments. This atmosphere tends
 to limit the spirit of free inquiry.
 Human rights groups report the State Secrets Committee continues to maintain
 special censorship ofices in state scientific and research institutes including those
 not conducting classified research. In September in an interview with the weekly
 paper Zerkalo Nedeli, the head of the State Secrets Committee stated that these of-
 ices should remain in such institutes because of the increasing activities of foreign
 companies in Ukraine. Restrictions by the Communications Ministry on the mailing
 of scientific documents have also caused concern. Several private and religiously af-
 filiated universities have been founded (or reestablished) since independence; all op-
 erate without any reported interference or harassment by the State.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for the right
 of assembly, and the Government generally respects this right in practice. The re-
 strictive Law on Public Assembly of 1989 circumscribes the freedom of assembly by
 stipulating that organizations must apply for permission to their respective locaad-
 ministration at least 10 days before a planned event or demonstration. The Con-
 stitution requires that demonstrators merely inform the authorities of a planned
 demonstration in advance. However, authorities insist that all demonstrations meet
 the restrictive requirements of the 1989 law. Under the 1989 law, participants in
 demonstrations are prohibited from inciting violence or ethnic conflict and from call-
 ing for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. Demonstrators may not
 interfere with traffic, obstruct the work of government bodies or enterprises, or oth-
 erwise hinder public order. In practice unlicensed demonstrations are common and
 most occur without police interference. A leader of the Republican Party was pros-
 ecuted in the winter in Kiev for staging a demonstration outside the Russian Em-
 bassy, although the party had informed the authorities of the demonstration in ad-
 vance. The protracted trial of Leopold Taburiansky, a leader of the People's Party
 who s'ent several months in the pretrial detention in 1996, continues in
 Onipropetrovsk. Taburiansky is charged with repeatedly organizing demonstrations
 without a permit on behalf of duped clients of pyramid schemes.
 The Constitution, law, and government regulations impose significant limits on
 freedom of association, and the Government uses onerous registration requirements
 to circumscribe this right. The Constitution prohibits the establishment of parties
 and organizations that advocate the elimination of Ukrainian independence or the
 
 
 1368
 violent overthrow of the Government and of the constitutional order; that jeopardize
 Ukraine's sovereignty or territorial integrity; that undermine its security; that fo-
 ment ethnic, racial, or religious hatred; that violate individual rights and liberties;
 or that jeopardize public health. The Government enacted- a regulation imposing
 limitations on the establishment of political parties that are not sufficiently region-
 ally represented. The requirement to have representatives in at least half the
 ,oblasts of the country as a prerequisite, for registration as a political party'nega-
 tively affects primarily Russian and Crimean Tatar organizations in Crimea.
 The 1992 Law on Public Organizations prohibits the State from financing political
 parties, and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties may
 not receive funds -from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign-banks. It. bars politi-
 cal parties from -having administrative or organizational structures abroad. The law
 prohibits police authorities,. members of the SBU, and. armed forces personnel from
 joining political parties. The- Constitution also prohibits establishment of political
 party organizations in the executive and judicial -branches, military units. state-
 owned enterprises, educational, and other public institutions. Many members of
 such bodies nonetheless-publicly associate themselves with specific parties.
 By law, the Ministry of Justice has the- authority to warn or fine a political party
 for illega activities or to temporarily suspenc its activities for up to 3 months, pro-
 vidgd that the Proscutors Office-has determine& that the. p arty has ,violated the
 Law on Public Organizations. Suspensions may be extended for 6 months upon the
 .Ministry's request.
 Freedom of association also is circumscribed by a registration requirement that
 lends itself to abuse and bureaucratic manipulation. Groups mustbe registered with
 the Government topursue almost any purpose, whether commercial, political, or
 philanthropic. The Ministries of Interior, Justice, Economy, and Foreign Economic
 Relations, as well as the Committees on Religion and-Broadcasting, all have reg-
 -istration functions, which have been used to prevent citizens from exercising their
 right of free association.
 Lack of registration has several -important disadvantages. Unregistered groups
 are prohibited from having bank accounts, acquiring property, or entering into con-
 tracts. The registration law gives the Government an unlimited right to inspect the
 activities of all registered groups. According to this law a registered gup must: 1)
 keep the Government apprised of all its activities, including notification of any
 meetings; 2) make its meetings open to all persons at all times, regardless of wheth-
 er or not they are members; and 3) upon request, present its registration documents
 to any government official, including the Prosecutor's Office, and be ready to prove
 that its activities are in compliance with its charter. A change in the groups charter
 necessitates reregistration. A -registered group may not .duplicate any unction br
 service that the Government is expected to provide. For example, human rights law-
 y ers who wish to represent prisoners- are prohibited from establishing an association
 ecause the Government is required by the Constitution to provide lawyers for the
 accused.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution and the 1991 Law on Freedom of Con-
 science and Religion provide for separation of church and state and permit religious
 -organizations to establish places of worship and to train clergy. The Government re-
 spects these rights in practice. However, a 1993 amendment restricts the activities
 of nonnative religious organizations. Religious organizations are required to register
 with local authorities and with the Governments Committee for Religious A airs,
 a process that generally takes about 1 month.
 A 1993 amendment to the 1991 religion law restricts the activities of normative
 religious organizations, narrowly defining the activities of members of the clergy,
 preachers, teachers, and other foreign citizen representatives of foreign organiza-
 tions. They may preach, administer religious ordinances, or practice other canonical
 activities only in those religious organizations which invited them to Ukraine and
 with official approval of the governmental body that registered the statutes and the
 articles of the pertinent religious organization."
 Some local officials have impeded the activities of foreign religious workers. For
 example, in August local officials in Odesa curtailed the visas of two foreign Mor-
 mon missionaries, arguing that they did not have permission to operate in Odesa.
 The missionaries left voluntarily but plan to challenge the law in court. All regional
 administrations have departments responsible for registration of various denomina-
 tions and religious groups and for supervision of compliance with the Law on the
 Freedom of Conscience and Religion.
 Government mediation failed to break a deadlock in the ongoing dispute among
 competing Orthodox Christian administrative bodies claiming to be "the Ukrainian
 Orthodox Church." In July leaders of major religious denominations and churches
 in Ukraine signed a government-drafted memorandum on the nonviolent resolution
 
 
 1369
 of religious disputes. The Government has been unable to stop disagreements be-
 tween the Orthodox believers and Greek Catholics in western Ukraine, where the
 two communities are contentious and often engage in bitter disputes over church
 buildings and property in over 600 localities. The Kiev Patriarchate of the Orthodox
 Church complains of harassment by local authorities in predominantly Russian-
 speaking eastern Ukraine, while the Moscow Patriarchate of the Orthodox Church
 complains that local governments turn a blind eye to the appropriation of their
 churches in Ukrainian-speaking western Ukraine by Ukrainian nationalists. The
 Moscow Patriarchate protested against the decision in June of the municipal council
 in Kiev to hand over most buildings of its Pecherska Lavra monastery to the Kiev
 Patriarchate, and described it as unwarranted state interference in religious affairs.
 The transfer had not been carried out at year's end.
 The Government has moved to reduce houses-of-worship utility fees and rental
 payments, to exempt them from the land tax, to expedite allotment of land plots for
 construction of new ones, and to return religious buildings to their former owners.
 Implementation of a 1992 decree on restitution of religious community property
 seized during the Soviet era remains stalled in many places. Jewish congregations
 in 33 towns and cities have negotiated successfully with local authorities for worship
 space. In 1996 a Kiev arbitration court decided in favor of transferring the title of
 the former Kiev Central Synagogue, which in Soviet times was used as a puppet
 theater, to a Chabad Hasidic congregation. By December the puppet theater had va-
 cated the synagogue. The decision sets an important precedent for the judiciary's
 role in religious property restitution. The Government has expanded already signifi-
 cant efforts to ensure that pilgrims of the Bratslav Hasidic sect are able to visit the
 tomb of their founding rabbi in the city of Uman on the occasion of the Jewish New
 Year. Representatives of the sect, a local Jewish community organization, and the
 local government reached an agreement in 1996 to build a synagogue at the site.
 In August two of three jailed leaders of the "White Brotherhood" religious cult
 were released under a mass amnesty. In 1996 they were sentenced to jail terms
 ranging from 4 to 7 years (on charges of staging mass disorder and resisting au-
 thorities) for their involvement in the 1993 seizure of St. Sofia's Cathedral in Kiev,
 which resulted in a violent clash with police.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement within the country is not restricted by law. How-
 ever, regulations impose a nationwide requirement to register at the workplace and
 place o residence in order to be eligible for social benefits, thereby complicating
 freedom of movement by limiting access to certain social benefits to the place where
 one is registered. People moving to other regions for work in the private sector, for
 instance, may be denied formaf access to free medical care and other services pro-
 vided by the State. Residence without registration carries a fine under the adminis-
 trative code, but this provision is rarely enacted. The Parliament scrapped the labor
 code requirement of a mandatory local residence registration for employment. The
 Government has not yet fulfilled its pledge to abolish mandatory registration and
 to replace it with an informational residence register.
 Persons born in Ukraine and living in Ukraine at the time of independence are
 considered citizens. Dual citizenship is not recognized. The amended citizenshi plaw
 encourages the existence of a multi-ethnic country. The law provides the right to
 Ukrainian citizenship for all individuals who were born or lived in Ukraine before
 independence and to their descendants who lived outside Ukraine as of November
 13, 1991. In order to be eligible, persons must not be citizens of other countries, and
 must submit their application by the year 2000. The amended law also provides the
 right to citizenship for deported victims of political oppression like the Crimean Ta-
 tars. Refugees can acquire Ukrainian citizenship if they have lived legally in
 Ukraine for 5 years. The conditions for Ukrainian citizenship are: honoring the Con-
 stitution and law; not being a citizen of another state; permanent residence in
 Ukraine for the past 5 years; an ability to communicate in Ukrainian; and provi-
 sions for a legal source of income. Since independence over 1.5 million Ukrainians
 have returned to Ukraine, while over 1 million people, mostly ethnic Russians, have
 left the country.
 Citizens who wish to travel abroad are able to do so freely, although exit visas
 are still required for most citizens. The Government may deny passports to individ-
 uals with access to state secrets, but a denial can be appealed.
 The Government has not supported a foreign-funded program to facilitate the
 travel to Ukraine of some emigrants who qualify for resettlement as refugees. Ap-
 proximately 260,000 Crimean Tatars have returned from exile to Crimea, mainly
 rom Central Asia. Crimean Tatar leaders have complained that their community
 has not received adequate assistance in resettling and that an onerous process of
 acquiring citizenship has excluded many of them from participating in elections and
 
 
 1370
 from the right to take part in the privatization of land and state assets. A May
 amendment to the citizenship law waives some of the usual residence and language
 requirements for returning deportees. This expedited procedure of acquiring citizen-
 ship by the deported victims of political oppression should facilitate the acquisition
 of citizenship by Crimean Tatars. The 1997 amendments to the Citizenship Law
 allow deported people, including Crimean Tatars, to acquire Ukrainian citizenship
 without a mandatory 5-year term of residence in Ukraine and without Ukrainian
 language proficiency. As with any other would-be citizens, Crimean Tatars are re-
 quired to provide official documents from their country of residence confirming that
 they no longer are citizens of that country. Under the law of Uzbekistan (from which
 most Tatars arrive), this procedure can take up to 1 year. According to Crimean
 Tatar representative Refat Chubarov, of some 260,000 (247,000 according to MVD
 statistics) Crimean Tatar repatriates, over 70,000 (64,000 according to MVD statis-
 tics) are not currently citizens of Ukraine.
 Ukraine is not a party to the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol. Its treatment of refugees is governed by the
 1993 Law on Refugees, which entitles refugees to all the benefits accorded to citi-
 zens. According to international observers, the Government has demonstrated a
 positive attitude toward those claiming refugee status. Refugee status is initially
 given for a -3-month term and subject to further extension. By October there were
 2,020 officially registered refugees (80 percent of the total are Afghans). A commit-
 ment has been made to .award refugee status to all Afghans who arrived in Ukraine
 before 1995. Under the new citizenship law, legally registered refugees can apply
 for Ukrainian citizenship after 5 years of permanent residence. Under the Refugee
 Law, refugees are entitled to materialassistance, but there is no money-in the badly
 strained national budget for this purpose. In cooperation with the U.N. High Com-
 missioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Government established a refugee receiving
 center for 200 people in Vinnytsya, and it plans to open another center in Luhansk.
 ,-Instances of police harassment of certain categories of refugees a ppear to have di-
 minished during the year. According to  the State Committee for Nationalities and
 -Migration, there is a .first asylum policy under the law. There have been no reports
 of forcible- deportation of asylum seekers or refugees. The press has reported that
 tens of thousands of-illegal migrants 'live in Ukraine for years with forged docu-
 ments. There were no reports of persons forced to return to countries where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for, Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 C Citizens exercised this right in 1994, when they elected-a new president and a
 new-parliament that represented a wide range of parties and ideologies. During par-
 liamentary by-elections at the be ginning of 1997, human rights groups received com-
 plaints of irregularities, especially in rural- constituencies. -Parliamentary elections
 are scheduled for March 1998.
 Dlha Kolinko, a-deputy Prosecutor general and anticorruption campaigner, unsuc-
 cessfully appealed the Central-Election Commission's decision to invalidate the re-
 sults of the- 1996 by-election in Lviv that she won. She claimed that the. decision
 was politically motivated..According to the-new Constitution, the Central Election
 Commission, not the Parliament, is to decide the ultimate validity of future election
 results.
 . Women are active in political life but hold a disproportionately small percentage
 of offices. Women hold-19 of the-450 seats in Parliament. Only two women hold min-
 isterial posts. The 18-member Constitutional Court has two female members.
 -Section 4- Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed-local and international human rights Noups to operate
 freely. Amnesty International and the U.S.-Ukrainian HumanRights Bureau mon-
 itor human rights. The Government,.has welcomed visits by foreign human rights
 organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The new Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other
 &unds; however, due in part to the absence of an effective judicial system, the
 Government has not been able to enforce effectively many of these provisions.
 Soctetal anti-Semitism exists. The Government has not prosecuted anti-Semitic acts
 under the Law Forbidding the Sowing of Interethnic Hatred. The Government also
 has not prosecuted those responsible for sexual discrimination. Human rights ex-
 perts also note that the police frequently harass dark-skinned young men.
 
 
 1371
 Women.-While comprehensive information measuring the extent of violence
 against women is not readily available, survey results suggest that the problem is
 pervasive. The number of reported rapes and attempted rapes has increased by 80
 percent over recent years. Surveys indicate that most women who have been sub-
 jected to physical abuse or rape never report it to the police. A 1995 poll of 600
 women conducted by a women's organization in Kharkiv indicated that 10 to 15 per-
 cent had been raped and over 25 percent subjected to physical abuse over the course
 of their lifetimes. Hot lines, shelters, and other practical support for victims of do-
 mestic violence are practically nonexistent.
 Separate statistics on prosecutions for wife beating or on average sentences are
 not available. Government representatives have acknowledged that when violence
 occurs the authorities often exert pressure on women to drop charges against their
 husbands in order to preserve the family. The low official incidence of reported
 crimes against women is mirrored by the lack of media attention to the subject.
 Many women's groups place a high priority on the issue but find it a difficult prob-
 lem to combat.
 Sexual trafficking in women to Western and Central Europe, Turkey, and the
 Middle East is reportedly common. Press reports place the number of women being
 trafficked in the thousands. The Government is only beginning to address the prob-
 lem. The authorities rarely prosecute men for engaging women in the explosively
 growing sector of sexually exploitative work. Nongovernmental organizations claim
 that the militia receive bribes in return for ignoring this problem.
 Labor law provides for equal rights for men and women, including equal pay for
 equal work, a principle that is generally observed. The Government has adopted a
 controversial program aimed at reducing women's involvement in hard labor and
 hazardous industries in conformity with a constitutional provision to safeguard
 women from hard labor. The Labor Code and the Law on Protection of Motherhood
 and Childhood prohibit women's labor at hard and hazardous jobs. For example, the
 law prohibits women from working in jobs that would require them to lift more than
 25 pounds at a time. However, the law is poorly enforced. According to human
 rights groups, women commonly perform difficult and hazardous labor, and manage-
 ment enforces the law only as necessary to lay off or fire female workers. Many
 women's rights advocates fear that it may be used to bar women from the best pay-
 ing blue-collar jobs. Women are much more likely to be laid off than men. Govern-
 ment statistics report that 57.7 percent of all registered unemployed persons are
 women, and it is estimated that women represent up to 90 percent of all newly un-
 employed persons.
 Few women attain top managerial positions in state and private industry. Accord-
 ing to government statistics, 69.2 percent of the country's 213,000 state administra-
 tion jobs are held by women, including 45.2 per cent of the managerial positions.
 However, of the highest "first" and "second" category offices, only 5.6 percent in
 central or local governments are filled by women. (These numbers do not include
 the "power ministries!--the Ministries of Defense, Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs,
 and the SBU which has substantially more male employees at all levels.) Edu-
 cational opportunities for woman have generally been, and continue to be, equal to
 those enjoyed by men.
 Women with children under age 15 are entitled to 2 additional days of annual va-
 cation. By law, pregnant women and mothers with small children enjoy paid mater-
 nity leave until their children reach the age off3. This benefit is a disincentive for
 employers to hire women from responsible or career track jobs.
 Children.-The Government is publicly committed to the defense of children's
 rights. Because of the deepening economic crisis, however, it is struggling to imple-
 ment its agenda. Public education for children is compulsory to the age of 15. In
 principle, there is free health care for children affected by the Chornobyl nuclear
 accident. Because of the worsening economic crisis and fraud committed by local of-
 ficials, roughly 3,000 kindergartens have been closed in recent years.
 Public concern over the fate of children adopted by foreigners triggered an amend-
 ment to the adoption law providing for thorough court examination of each case and
 follow-up monitoring of the children's well-being.
 In April the All-Ukrainian Committee for Protection of Children released survey
 results revealing that every fifth or sixth child of both sexes under 18 suffers from
 sexual harassment (including every third girl), and every tenth girl is raped. The
 low priority the public and the government attaches to children's rights is reflected
 in the absence of groups aggressively promoting children's' rights. For example, the
 widely acknowledged problem of growing violence and crime in and outside schools,
 especially the notoriously violent vocational schools, is largely ignored by the public
 and the Government.
 
 
 1372
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled,
 but, especially with the economic crisis, the Government has been unable to support
 programs targeted at increasing opportunities for the disabled. The law mandates
 access to buildings for the disabled, but it is poorly enforced.
 Religious Minorities.--Jews, the second largest religious minority in the country,
 have expanded opportunities to pursue their religious and cultural activities. Anti-
 Semitism continues to exist on an individual basis but is virtually nonexistent at
 the official level. Some Ukrainian and American Jewish organizations continue to
 urge the Government to speak out more forcefully against, and prosecute cases of,
 anti-Semitism. There are freely operating Jewish cultural centers and educational
 institutions, including several colleges. However, some ultranationalist Ukrainian
 groups continued to circulate anti-Semitic tracts. Anti-Semitic articles continued to
 appear in a few local newspapers, especially in western Ukraine and Kiev. The Lviv
 newspaper Za Vilnu Ukrayinu and the Kiev-based Vechirnyy Kyyiv publish anti-Se-
 mitic diatribes. Article 66 of the Criminal Code prescribes up to 3 years' imprison-
 ment or 1 year of corrective labor, or a fine for fomenting interethnic hatred; the
 Law on the Print Media and the Law on Television and Radio also prohibit foment-
 ing interethnic hatred. Jewish groups report that anti-Semitic incidents continued
 in some regions. The Israeli cultural center in Kharkiv was firebombed in February.
 The Israeli Embassy reported that the police were cooperative. An Arab organiza-
 tion has-claimed responsibility, although the police have not yet identified a suspect.
 Several Jewish cemeteries were vandalized. The legacy of post-1940 demolition of,
 or construction on, Jewish cemeteries, both by Nazi occupiers and by the Soviet Gov-
 ernment, continued during the year. In many instances Ukrainian officials inherited
 cases of Jewish cemetery land having been appropriated for other uses in the inter-
 vening years, as Soviet law permitted reuse of cemetery land 25 years after the final
 burial in the cemetery. The most problematic case was that of the historic Jewish
 cemetery in Lviv, which saw its last burial in the 19th century, total ruin by Nazi
 forces in 1942, and construction of a market on the land by Soviet authorities in
 1947-1964. Similarly, in Berdychiv private garages had been constructed atop bur-
 ial grounds; and in Mlyniv a hotel and parking. lot encroach on a cemetery site.
 Local government officials have respondedwith varying degrees of concern to these
 problems. The Government quickly addressed the issue at the presidential level in
 1996, giving an order that all construction or privatization on the land of Jewish
 cemeteries be immediately frozen. Negotiations on reaching an ultimate resolution
 of the problem are ongoing.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-With some important exceptions, there are
 only. isolated cases of ethnic discrimination in Ukraine. The Constitution provides
 for "the free development, use and protection of the Russian language and other mi-
 nority languages- in Ukraine." This compromise builds on a 1991 Law on National
 Minorities, which played an instrumental role in preventing ethnic strife by allow-
 ing individual citizens to use their respective national languages in conducting per-
 sonal business and by allowing minority groups to establish their own schools.
 Some pro-Russian organizations in eastern Ukraine complained about the in-
 creased use of Ukrainian in schools and in the media. They claim that their children
 are disadvantaged when taking academic entrance examihations, since all appli-
 cants are required to take a Ukrainian language test. Regional councils in Kharkiv
 and Donetsk again decided in 1997 to give the Russian language official status
 alongside Ukrainian. The local prosecutors suspended these decisions as violating
 the law on the Ukrainian state language.
 With the exception of two regions, there is no evidence of serious ethnic tension.
 In some parts of western Ukraine, small Russian, Jewish, and other minority groups
 credibly accuse some local Ukrainian ultranationalists of fostering ethnic hatred and
 printing anti-Semitic tracts. They also charge that local authorities have not taken
 action against those who foment ethnic hatred. In Crimea, Ukrainian and Crimean
 Tatar minorities credibly complain of discrimination by the Russian majority and
 demand that Ukrainian and Tatar languages be given equal treatment to Russian.
 The Ukrainian community in Crimea has criticized the national Government for tol-
 erating radical anti-Ukrainian and Russian chauvinistic groups on the peninsula.
 While the Crimean government, pleading insufficient funds, did not assent to re-
 quests from the Crimean Tatar community for assistance in reestablishing its cul-
 tural heritage through Tatar language publications and educational institutions, the
 central government is working with the UNHCR, the Organization for Security and
 Cooperation in Europe, and the International Organization for Migration on support
 for the Crimean Tatar community.
 
 
 1373
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to join trade
 unions to defend "professional, social and economic interests." Under the Constitu-
 tion, all trade unions have equal status, and no government permission is required
 to establish a trade union. The 1992 Law on Citizens' Organizations (which includes
 trade unions) stipulates noninterference by public authorities in the activities of
 these organizations, which have the right to establish and join federations on a vol-
 untary basis. In principle all workers and civil servants (including members of the
 armed forces) are free to form unions. In practice the Government discourages cer-
 tain categories of workers, for example, nuclear power plant employees, from doing
 SO.
 The successor to the Soviet trade unions, known as the Federation of Trade
 Unions (FPU), has begun to work independently of the Government and has been
 vocal in advocating workers' right to strike. The FPU urged Parliament to adopt a
 new trade union law to replace old Soviet-era legislation. It has supported, for in-
 stance, the protests of miners and other professions over unpaid wages. As during
 the Soviet era, most FPU affiliates work closely with management. Enterprise man-
 agers are free to join the FPU. The FPU has no official or legal relationship with
 any plitical party.
 Independent unions now provide an alternative to the official unions in most sec-
 tors of the economy. The indenendent Miners' Union of Ukraine (NPGU), unions
 representing pilots, civil air traffic controllers, locomotive engineers, aviation ground
 crews, and other unions operate either independently or within one of three national
 confederations. Independent unions have unsuccessfully claimed a share of the
 former Soviet Union's huge property and funds, especially the social insurance bene-
 fits fund, a Soviet-era legacy traditionally controlled by the official unions.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "to defend one's economic and so-
 cial interests." The Constitution states that strikes must not jeopardize national se-
 curity, public health, or the rights and liberties of others. The Law on Labor Conflict
 Resolution does not extend this right to members of the armed forces, civil and secu-
 rity services, and employees of "continuing process plants," for example, metallur-
 cal factories. The law prohibits strikes that "may infringe on the basic needs of
 population," for example, rail and air transportation. Strikes based on political
 demands are also illegal. The Government has relied on the prosecutors and courts
 to deal with strikes that it considers illegal.
 The Workers' Strike Committee, a labor organization in the coal sector in
 Donetsk, defied the regional arbitration court's banning order for inciting unrest
 during protests by miners over unpaid wages in 1996. After a protracted trial its
 leader, Mykhaylo Krylov, received amnesty after being sentenced to a prison term
 for inciting civil disorder in 1996.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies. The NPGU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Law on Enterprises
 states that joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues concerning
 wages working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the enter-
 prise level. Overlapping spheres of responsibility frequently impede the collective
 argaining process. The Government, in agreement with trade unions, establishes
 wages in each industrial sector and invites all unions to participate in the negotia-
 tions.
 The manner in which the collective bargaining law is applied prejudices the bar-
 gaining process against the independent unions and favors the official unions (affili-
 ates of the FPU). Most workers are never informed that they are not obligated to
 join the official union. Renouncing membership in the official union and joining an
 independent union can be bureaucratically onerous and is typically discourages by
 management. The Independent Miners' Union (NPG) in the coal mining town of
 Krasnodon, Luhansk Oblast, for example, has complained about the management's
 discrimination and harassment of its members. The collective bargaining law pro-
 hibits antiunion discrimination. Under the law disputes are supposed to be resolved
 by the courts. There have been cases in which such disputes have not been settled
 in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to exist. The Government does not specifically
 Srohibit forced and bonded labor by children, however, the Constitution and the
 tabor Code prohibit forced labor generally. There were press reports that young
 children from families of alcoholics are sold to Roma and vagabonds who force them
 into begging or prostitution.
 
 
 1374
 Student groups protested against a presidential decree obliging college and uni-
 versity graduates, whose studies have been paid for by the Government, to work in
 the public sector at government-designated jobs for 3 years or to fully repay the cost
 of their education. Students described the decree as an attempt to introduce compul-
 sory labor. The Government stated that the decree would cover only students who
 entered higher education institutions in 1997.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment does not specifically prohibit forced and bonded labor by children (see sec-
 tion 6.c.). The minimum employment age is 17 years. In certain nonhazardous in-
 dustries, however, enterprises may negotiate with the Government to hire employ-
 ees between 14 and 17 years of age, with the consent of one parent. The Constitu-
 tion provides for general secondary education. School attendance is compulsory to
 the age of 15, a regulation vigorously enforced by the Ministry of Education. How-
 ever, since Soviet times the number of drop-outs has dramatically increased, mostly
 because of rising poverty. The Criminal Code prescribes up to 5 years in prison for
 involving children in criminal activities, drinking, begging, prostitution, gambling,
 or other exploitation.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum monthly wage and pension is
 $5.30 (15 hryvnas), which does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker
 and family. The official poverty line is about $39 (70.9 hryvnas) per month. It is
 estimated that some 50 percent of the population officially live below that line, al-
 though the practice of underreporting sources of income is widespread. Annual infla-
 tion has decreased from 39.7 percent in 1996 to 10.1 percent in 1997.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, a 24-hour day of rest
 per week, and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year. Stagnation in some indus-
 tries, for example, defense, significantly reduced the workweek for some categories
 of workers.
 Human rights gups report that graduates were forced to take a government-des-
 ignated job or ful    a the cost of their education. For example, human rights
 group in Zaporizhzhya reported that graduates of a medical school were forced to
 take up jobs in villages in the Chornobyl zone. Another human rights group re-
 ported that graduates of the law school were forced to accept jobs at the proseutors
 office.
 The law contains occupational safety and health standards, but these are fre-
 quently ignored in practice. Lax safety standards caused many serious mine acci-
 dents, resulting in 290 deaths in 1997, representing a continuing high ratio of fatali-
 ties per ton of coal extracted in light of decreasing coal output. In theory workers
 have a legal right to remove themselves from dangerous work situations without
 jeopardizing continued employment. In reality, however, independent trade union-
 ists report that asserting this right would result in retaliation or perhaps dismissal
 by management.
