 UKRAINE
 Under the new Constitution adopted in June, the President, elected for a 5-year
 term, and a one-chamber Parliament (the Rada), elected for a 4-year term, share
 responsibility for governance. (Transitional provisions continue the current Presi-
 dent's and Parliament's terms until October 1999, and March 1998, respectively.)
 President Leonid Kuchma was elected in 1994. The President appoints the Cabinet
 and controls government operations. Under the new Constitution, the judiciary is
 funded independently, instead of through the Ministry of Justice. However, the
 court system remains subject to political interference.
 The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the
 Ministry of Defense all have equal status and report to the President through the
 Cabinet. The heads of these three institutions sit in the Cabinet of Ministers. The
 armed forces have largely remained outside politics. Although the SBU has not
 interfered in the political process, it can affect it through criminal investigations
 against politicians and influential businessmen. The SBU, police, and prosecutos
 office have drawn public criticism for their failure to take adequate action to curb
 institutional corruption and abuse in the Government. Members of the security
 forces committed human rights abuses.
 Ukraine is making a difficult transition from central planning to a market-based
 economy. According to official statistics, about half of the work force is formally em-
 ployed in manufacturing, with the balance divided between services and agriculture,
 although in reality many industrial enterprises have reduced or  pped production.
 Exports are diversified and include metals, chemicals, sugar, and semi-finished
 goods. Annual per capita gross domestic product is approximately $800. President
 Kuchmia's economic reform program has achieved partial macroeconomic stabiliza-
 tion and curtailed inflation, allowing the Government to introduce the new currency,
 the hryvna, in September. The private sector has grown significantly and now rep-
 resents a substantial portion of the economy, although that growth which is in the
 unofficial shadow economy is not fully reflected inofficial government statistics.
 Nevertheless, the country remains in a serious economic crisis. Industrial output
 continues to decline, and shrinking revenue has left millions of employees unpaid
 for several months.
 Overall, Ukraine continued to make significant progress toward building a law-
 based civil society. Reports of human rights violations remained at the same low
 level as last year. Problems remain in the unreformed legal and prison systems. Po-
 lice and prison officials regularly beat detainees and prisoners, and the Government
 rarely punishes officials who commit such abuses. ron conditions remain poor,
 and lety pretrial detention under poor conditions is a problem. The judiciary is
 overburdened and lacks sufficient funding and staff. Long delays in trials are a
 problem. While progress has been made toward ensuring the independence of the
 judiciary, political interference continues to affect the judicial process. There are oc-
 casional government attempts to control the press, and significant limits on freedom
 of association and on nonnative religious organizations. Significant societal anti-
 Semitism, violence against women, as well as discrimination against women, and
 both ethnic and religious minorities, persists.
 The new Constitution provides safeguards for human rights and strengthens the
 courts by establishing the principle of judicial review. It establishes a Constitutional
 Court with the power to determine the constitutionality of acts and decisions by all
 branches of government. The new Constitution also provides for a human rights om-
 budman, to be appointed by Parliament, who is to be responsible for assisting citi-
 zens in defending their rights. The efficacy of the new Constitution, however, de-
 pends on enabling legislation, most of which had not been passed by year's end.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by government agents, but in some instances the line between politically
 motivated killing and criminal activities was difficult to distingnish. The Govern-
 ment's inability to stem economic decline and check the growth of violent, organized
 criminal activity had major repercussions. Politicians continued to be the victims-
 
 
 1181
 whether through killing or kidnaping-of organized criminal groups, aided in a few
 cases, either actively or passively, by corrupt officials. In July the Prime Minister
 narrowly escaped an alleged assassination attempt in Kiev when a bomb reportedly
 exploded near his car. No suspects have so far been identified. In November a Radi
 Deputy and business magate was killed at Donetsk Airport by unknown persons.
 It was the first known killing of a deputy since independence. The number of con-
 tract killings of members of the business community, often managers of state-owned
 enterprises, remained high. Three senior officials of an important steel plant, Azov-
 Stal, were killed in a suspicious car crash. The heads of two major natural gas uim-
 prigompanies, one in Kiev and one in Donetsk, were murdred in Marc  and
 Aprld uin  aperiod of fundamental changea in the Government's gas supypol-
 icy.. Politicians were also targeted because oT their influence over atate-owned enter-
 prises.
 The undermining of governmental authority was particularly serious in Crimea.
 The central Government in Kiev lacks institutional control over the peninsula, and
 the Crimean authorities are widely alleged to be compromised by ties to organized
 criminal elements. Early this year the central Government replaced the Crimean
 prosecutor and the leadership of the local police for their inability to curb violent
 crime, including their failure to solve any of the 35 alleged contract murders com-
 mitted in 1995. The new Crimean police leadership claims to have solved 13 of 21
 contract murders on the peninsula to date this year and to have detained some local
 criminal leaders. Officials of the Party of Economic Renaissance of the Crimea were
 the targets of a spate of shootings and bombin   A ril. A Simferopol municipal
 council deputy was wounded by automatic gunn-e in hi car in January and an-
 other was iled in his apartment in September. The Mayor of Sevastopol was the
 victim of a bombing in October.
 b. Disappearance.-In August the Speaker of the Crimean Legislature claimed
 that he had been kidnaped and beaten by unidentified assailants. The January 1994
 disappearance of Myhailo Boichyshyn a prominent leader of the Popular Movement
 of Ukraine (RUKH), remains unsolved.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 The Constitution prohibits torture; however, police and prison officials regularly
 beat detainees and prisoners. There is no effective mechanism for registering com-
 plaints about mistreatment or for obtaining redress, although the human rights om-
 budsman required by the new Constitution may provide such a mechanism. With
 the single exception of a police officer jailed for torturing detainees, the Government
 made no known efforts during the year to end the practice or to punish officials who
 committed such abuses.
 A member of Parliament from Kiev, Myroslav Gorbatiuk (who was placed in an
 intensive care unit after a brutal assault), and a former parliamentarian from
 Zaporizhzhia, Victor Slesarenko (whose car was blown up), claimed that violent at-
 tacks against them were linked to their investigations into high-level corruption in
 the Government. The Government has not yet announced the results of its inves-
 tigations of these allegations.
 There were no reported cases of political abuse of psychiatry. However human
 rights groups claim that there are isolated cases of abuse of psychiatric diagnosis
 for economic reasons, relating to property, inheritance, or divorce-related disputes.
 The disputes often entail the corruption of psychiatric experts and court officials.
 The Ukrainian Psychiatric Association submitted to the Rada a new draft law on
 psychiatry designed to curb such abuses. The government-owned media have begun
 report'g instances of psychiatric abuse.
 Conditions in pretrial detention facilities routinely fail to meet basic human rights
 standards. Inmates are sometimes held in "investigative isolation" for extended peri-
 ods and subjected to intimidation and mistreatment by jail guards. Overcrowding
 is common in blocks for prisoners who have been charged with a crime and are
 awaiting trial or are in investigative detention.
 Prison conditions are poor. Despite government efforts to maintain minimum
 international standards in the prisons for convicted prisoners, the worsening eco-
 nomic crisis has led to a further deterioration of these facilities. Overcrowding, poor
 sanitation, and inadequate medical care are all problems in the prisons.
 The Government generally permits visits by human rights monitors, although
 human rights groups have complained of being refused access to some prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that authorities may
 detain a person suspected of a crime for 3 days without a warrant. The new Con-
 stitution provides that only the courts may issue arrest warrants, but under its
 "transitional provisions" the prosecutor's ofice retains the authority to issue arrest
 and search warrants for 5 more years. An arrest order must be issued if the period
 of detention exceeds 3 days. The maximum period of detention after charges have
 
 
 1182
 been filed is 18 months, but the law does not limit the aggregate time of detention
 before and durig the trial. The law permits citizens to contest an arrest in court
 or appeal to the prosecutor.
 By-law a trial must begin no later than 3 weeks after the defendant is indicted.
 This requirement is frequently not met by the overburdened court system, where
 months may pas before a defendant is finally brought to trial
 The law stipulates that a defense attorney be provided without charge to the indi-
 gent from the moment of detention or the f     of charges, whichever comes first.
 However, it has been credibly alleged that individuals he d under preventive deten-
 tion frequently have been denied timely access to counsel In addition there are in-
 sufficient numbers of defense attorneys to protect suspects from unlawful, lengthy
 imprisonment under extremely poor conditions. Although the concept of providing
 attorneys from the state system remains inprinciple, public attorneys often refuse
 to defend indigents for the low government fee. Once a suspect is taken into deten-
 tion, the prsner may talk to a lawyer only in. the presence of a prison official or
 an investigatr. To protect the defendant, each investigative file must contain a doc-
 umnt signed by the defendant attesting that his right to have a defender was ex-
 plained as were the c   as aainst him. An appeals ourt may dismiss a conviction
 or order a new trial if this document is missig. As defendants became aware of
 their rights, they increasingly insisted on observance of these procedures. However,
 many still were not aware and hence did not make use of these safeguards.
 Exile as a punishment no longer exists in the law, and the Government observes
 this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The new Constitution provides for the establish-
 ment of an independent judiciary; however, the judiciary remains subject to political
 interference.
 The existing court system is divided into courts of general jurisdiction and arbi-
 tration, or commercial, courts. The courts of general jurisdiction are divided into
 criminal and civil sections. The courts are organized on three levels: rayon (district)
 courts (also known as peoples' courts), oblast (regional) courts, and the Supreme
 Court. There are 742 district and city courts, 27 regional courts, 26 military courts,
 and an interregional court. All may act as a court of first instance depending on
 the nature and seriousness of the crime. A case heard in the first instance by the
 Supreme Court, therefore may not be appealed or overruled. Military courts only
 handle cases involv    military personnel Cases are decided by judges who ait sin-
 gly (in principle with two public assessors), or in ups of three or more serious
 cases. As it has become increasingly difficult to find unpaid public assessors willing
 to attend a trial, most cases are tried by a single judge. There are no clear rules
 to determine which court first hears a case.
 Under the new Constitution, justice is to be administered by the Constitutional
 Court and general urisdiction ourts with the Supreme Court at their head. The
 judicial system is also to include local and appeals courts, as well as special courts
 to be established by future legislation, headed by their respective highest courts.
 Pending formation of the new judicial system the old system remains in place, in-
 cluding the present Supreme and Supreme Arbitration Cor, for a maximum period
 of 5 years.
 The Parliament, the President, and the Congress of Judges each appoint 6 of the
 18 members for 9-year terms to the Constitutional Court. The Court Chairman is
 elected for a 3-year term by the 18 justices from among their own ranks. On October
 18, 16 of the 18 justices were sworn in. The new Constitution strengthens the courts
 by establishing the principle of judicial review. The Constitutional Court is to be the
 ultimate interpreter of legislation and the Constitution. It will determine the con-
 stitutionality of legislation, of Presidential edicts, of Cabinet acts, and of acts of the
 Crimean Autonomy.
 Prosecutors like the courts, a  also organized into offices at the rayon, oblast,
 and republic levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General, who
 is appointed by the President and confirmed by the Parliament for a 5-year term.
 Regional and drict prosecutors are appointed by the Prosecutor General. Prosecu-
 tors and defense attorneys by law have eual status before the courts. In practice,
 however, prosecutors still are very influential because court proceedings are not con-
 ducted in an adversrial manner and the procuracy, in its pretrial investigative
 function, often acts in effect as a grand jury. The prosecutor directs all investiga-
 tions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and SBU, or he may use the investigative
 resources of his office. The new Constitution considerably curtails the prosecutor's
 authority, limiting it to prosecution, representing the public interest in court, over-
 sight of investigations, and implementation of court decisions. However, the new
 Constitution allows the prosecutor's office to continue to conduct investigations and
 oversee general observance of the law.
 
 
 1183
 Judges are appointed by the President for an initial 5-year term, after which they
 are subject to parliamentary approval for lifetime tenure. Judges are selected for
 nomination or dismissed by the Supreme Judicial Council, which is also authorized
 to discipline judges--incding judges of the Supreme Court and supreme special
 courts--and prosecutors for violations of the law. Te Supreme Judicial Council con-
 sits of 20 members nominated by the 3 branches of government and by professional
 associations from the law and procuracy sectors. It also includes the Chairman of
 the Supreme Court the Minister of Justice, and the Prosecutor General of Ukraine.
 Many serving judges and prosecutors were appointed during the Soviet era, when
 political influence pervaded the criminal justice system. Human rights lawyers
 claim that the judiciary is not free from government influence, particularly at the
 regional and local levels. Judges, prosecutors, and other court officials appear to re-
 main closely attuned to local government interests. Organized crime elements are
 also widely alleged to influence court decisions. According to the Justice Ministry,
 in 1995 38 judges were disci lined, 8 dismissed, and several prosecuted on criminal
 charges, mostly for bribery. Ro higher court judge has been disciplined to date. Al-
 though statistics are not available, the Justice Ministry reports that some judges
 have been prosecuted and disciplined this year. Criminal elements routinely use in-
 timidation to induce victims and witnesses to withdraw or change their testimony.
 Human rights groups contend that judicial processes are sometimes affected by the
 biases of expert advisers, who answer to government investigative and prosecutorial
 bodies.
 The judiciary is inefficient and lacks sufficient staff and funds. Although the
 workload per judge is now only half that of the 1980's, the judiciary continues to
 draw criticism for its slowness and inefficiency. By October the judiciary had re-
 ceived only 36 percent of the funds earmarked for it in the budget; barely enough
 to pay the judges and staff the courts. According to the Justice Ministry, some 37
 percent of the courts are inadequately housed. The authority of the judicial system
 is also undermined by a poor record of compliance with court decisions in civil and
 economic cases.
 The new Constitution includes procedural provisions to ensure a fair trial, includ-
 ing the right of a suspect or witness to refuse to testify against himself or his rel-
 atives. However, pending passage of legislation implementing the Constitution, a
 largely Soviet-era criminal justice system remains in place. W e the defendant is
 presumed innocent, conviction rates have not changed since the Soviet era. Nearly
 99 per cent of completed cases result in convictions. Judges frequently send cases
 unlikely to end in convictions back to the prosecutor's office for "additional inves-
 tigation." Such cases may then be dropped or closed, occasionally without informing
 the court or the defendant. It is commonly believed that suspects frequently bribe
 court officials todop charges before cases go to trial. Consequently, conviction rates
 are a somewhat misleading statistic. According to the Justice Ministry, in the first
 half of the year 35.2 per cent of convicted defendants tried on criminal charges were
 sent to jail. The rest received suspended sentences. Complicated cases can take
 years to go to trial. In the interim, defendants wait in pretrial detention. Bail does
 not exist.
 Present and former members of the Parliament, members of local councils, and
 judges enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution unless the Parliament or the re-
 spective council gives its consent to criminal proceedings. Consent is rarely given
 in practie.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. A human rights group in
 Zaporizhzhia claims that its leader, currently serving a 1-year term in jail for insult-
 ing a judge, was framed for exposing corruption in the local courts. It alleges that
 he was denied a proper defense. A group of parliamentarians who appealed to the
 Prosecutor General's Office demanding a retrial has not yet received an answer.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al
 though the new Constitution requires that courts issue search warrants, its provi-
 sions have not yet been implemented. Prosecutors are issuing search warrants dur-
 ing the transition period. The SBU, for reasons of national security, may conduct
 intrusive surveillance and searches without a warrant. Human rights groups report
 receiving no complaints of invasion of privacy by the SBU. The Prosecutor General's
 Office oversees the SBU, but the extent to which it utilizes that authority to monitor
 SBU activities and to curb excesses by security officials is unknown. The new Con-
 stitution provides citizens with the right to examine any dossier the SBU has on
 them and to sue for physical or emotional damages incurred by an investigation.
 The remnants of Soviet control mechanisms survive in many guises. Militia per-
 sonnel have the right to stop vehicles arbitrarily and need no prbable cause to ini-
 tiate extensive document checks and inspection of all parts of the vehicle. Citizens
 
 
 1184
 who have committed no violation, or only a minor one, often prefer to pay a bribe
 to avoid a time-consuming inspection.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution and a 1991 law provide for
 freedom of speech and the press; however, the Government occasionally attempts to
 control the press. Criticism of the Government is tolerated; however, some journal-
 ists practice self-censorship, and the Government largely controls the broadcast
 media.
 The print media, both independent and government-supported, demonstrate a
 tendency towards self-censorship on matters sensitive to the Government. The exec-
 utive branch, through the Ministry of Press and Information, subsidizes the oper-
 ations of some large-scale publications. The Ministry has warned some periodicals
 against fomenting ethnic tensions and conducting antistate propaganda and has ap-
 plied to the prosecutor's office to open investigations into those newspapers. How-
 ever, no newspapers are known to have been prosecuted as a result. Private news-
 papers have also been established and are free to function on a purely commercial
 basis. However, they practice self-censorship and are subject to various pressures
 such as control of access to affordable state-subsidized newsprint; dependence on po-
 litical patrons who may facilitate financial support from the State Press Support
 Fund; close scrutny from  grnment officials especially at the local level; and po-
 motivated visits bytax inspectors. Foreign-owned newspapers are per-
 The broadcast media remain largely under state ownership. They are managed by
 the State Committee on Television and Radio ("Derhteleradio"), whose head, ac-
 cording to the new Constitution, is appointed by the President and confirmed by
 Parliament. The President and the Parliament each appoint half of the members of
 the regulatory beard for broadcasting, the National Council for Television and Radio
 Broadcasting. Under current legislation, private and foreign companies are entitled
 to establish and operate their own transmission facilities, provided that they obtain
 a license from the National Council. News programs that cover domestic political
 developments, notably "Vikna" ("Windows") and 'Pislamova" ("Epiloge"), have
 fended off attempts by Derzhteleradio to preview and revise the content of their pro-
 grams. Derzhteleradio denied the independent news program "Vkna" its time slot.
 However, with widespread popular and official support, n a ou   t its way back
 on the air. Derhteleradio suspended without warning the broadcast contract of
 "Pislamova, an investigative news show, which was unable to broadcast on a state
 channel for 8 months. uring that time Pislamova was broadcast on a less widely
 received private channel. It returned to the state channel on September 6. In
 Kharkiv a television correspondent was fired and his editor repriman  or criticiz-
 ing the presidential draft of the Constitution. The Government disavowed any con-
 nection with the incident. Most local observers believe that it was the doing of an
 independent, overzealous local bureaucrat.
 In 1994 President Kuchma abolished the State Committee for the Protection of
 State Secrets that had enjoyed broadly defined powers over all media. The Commit-
 tee was absorbed into the Ministry of Press and Information, where it is now the
 Main Directorate for the Protection of State Secrets. According to journalists, this
 Department has not interfered with the practice of their craft. In 1996 the State
 Committee for State Secrets and Technical Protection of Information was reestab-
 lished. State secrets are prohibited from publication. An editor of the newspaper
 "Opositsidya ("Opposition"), Ivan Makar, was sentenced by a metropolitan court to
 a suspended prison term of 2 years for libeling the President and his staff. The
 newspaper was closed by order of a Kiev court for publishing caricatures of the
 President and his staff. Its equipment was confiscated. In June more than 70 promi-
 nent journalists issued an appeal protesting increasing political and commercial
 pressure on the media.
 Reporting on organized crime and corruption in the Government, including mis-
 conduct by high-ranking cabinet and administration officials, is becoming increas-
 ingly bold. Journalists contend that they have been subject to threats, including the
 threat of arrest, and violent assaults for aggressively reporting on crime and official
 corruption. The journalistic cmmunity links thesuspiious death of an investiga-
 tive reporter in Cherkasy to the corrupt elements he was investigating.
 While the major universities are state owned, they now ostensibly operate under
 full autonomy. Academic freedom within universities, however, is an_ underdevel-
 oped and pooIly understood concept. University administrators are traditionally con-
 servative establishment figures and possess the power to silence professors with
 whom they disagree by dnying them the possibility to publish or more directly by
 withholding pay or housing benefits. This atmosphere tends to limit the spirit of
 
 
 1185
 free inquir. Human rights groups report the restoration of special censorship offices
 in scientific and researCitites, includin  those not conducting classified re-
 search. Restrictions by the Communications M.istry on the mailifg of scientific
 documents have also caused concern. Several private and religiously ffiliated uni-
 versities have been founded (or reestablished) since independence; all operate with-
 out any reported interference or harassment by the State.
 b. Freedbm of Peaceful Assembly and Asaociation.-The law provides for the right
 of assembly; and the Government generally respects this right in practice. The Law
 on Public Assembly of 1989 stipulates that organizations must apply for permission
 to the respective local administration 10 days fore a planned event or demonstra-
 tion. The new Constitution requires that demonstrators merely inform the authori-
 ties of a planned demonstration in advance. Under the 1989 law, participants in
 demonstrations are prohibited from inciting violence or ethnic conflict and from call-
 ing for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. Demonstrators may not
 interfere with traffic, obstruct the work of government bodies or enterprises, or oth-
 erwise hinder public order. Unlicensed demonstrations are common and have oc-
 curred without police interference. There were isolated cases of criminal prosecution
 of demonstrators for unauthorized demonstrations in Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk.
 In the most high profile case, a leader of the small People's Party in Dnipropetrovsk,
 Leopold Tabunanky, spent several months in jail pending trial on charges of re-
 peatedly demonstrating without a permit on behalf of duped clients of pyramid
 schemes.
 The Constitution, law, and government regulations impose significant limits on
 freedom of association, and the Government uses onerous registration requirements
 to circumscribe this right. The Constitution prohibits the establishment of parties
 and organizations that advocate the elimination of Ukrainian independence or the
 violent overthrow of the Government and of the constitutional order, that jeopardize
 Ukraine's sovereignty or territorial inte gty, that undermine its security, that fo-
 ment ethnic, racial or religious hatred; that violate individual rights and liberties;
 or that jeopardize public health. The Constitution also forbids political parties to
 form paramilitary branches. The Government enacted a regulation imposing limita-
 tions on the establishment of regional political parties through restrictive registra-
 tion requirements. Informed international observers noted that the requirement to
 have representatives in at least half the oblasts of the country as a prerequisite for
 registration as a political party negatively affects primarily Russian and Tatar orga-
 nizations in Crimea.
 The 1992 Law on Public Organizations prohibits the State from financing political
 parties and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties may
 not receive funds from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. It bars politi-
 cal parties from having administrative or organizational structures abroad. The law
 pr hibits police authorities, members of the SBU, and armed forces personnel from
 joining political parties. The Constitution also prohibits establishment of political
 party organizations in the executive and judicial branches, military units state-
 owned enterprises, educational, and other public institutions. Many members of
 such bodies nonetheless publicly associate themselves with specific parties.
 By law the Ministry of Justice has the authority to warn or fine a political party
 for illegal activities or to temporarily suspend its activities for up to 3 months, pro-
 vided that the prosecutor's office determined that the party violated the Law on
 Public Organizations. The Ministry used this authority to issue a warning to the
 Communist Party for collecting signatures calling for a referendum in support of so-
 cialism and reintegration of the former Soviet Republics.
 Freedom of association is circumscribed by an onerous registration requirement
 that lends itself to abuse and bureaucratic manipulation. Groups must be registered
 with the Government to pursue almost any purpose, whether commercial, political,
 or philanthropic. The Ministries of Justice, Economy and Foreign Economic Rela-
 tions as well as the Committees on Religion and Broadcasting among others all have
 registration functions, which they have used at one time or another to prevent citi-
 zens from exercising their right of free association.
 Not being registered has several important disadvantages. For example unregis-
 tered groups are prohibited from having bank accounts, acquiring property, or enter-
 ing into contracts. Furthermore, the registration law gives the Government an un-
 limited right to inspect the activities of all registered groups. According to this law
 a registered group must: 1) keep the Government apprised of all its activities, in-
 cluding notification of any meetings; 2) make its meetings open to all persons at all
 times, regardless of whether or not they are members; and 3) upon request, present
 its registration documents to any government official, including the prosecutor's of-
 fice, and be ready to prove that it is in compliance with the puro ses of the group
 as set out in its registration documents. A change in the groups purposes neces-
 
 
 1186
 sitates reregistration. A registered group may not duplicate any fimction or service
 that the Government is supposed to provide. For example human rights lawyers
 who wish to represent prisoners are prohibited from establishing an association to
 do so because the Government is supposed to provide lawyers for the accused.
 The Ministry of Justice revoked the registration of one of two rival Social Demo-
 cratic Parties of Ukraine after a party split. One party leader, a former Justice Min-
 ister, is accused of using manipulation and fraud to register the parallel party. The
 Ministry alleges that the rosters of the party he sought to register were falsified.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-The new Constitution and the 1991 Law on Freedom of
 Conscience and Religion provide for separation of church and state and permit reli-
 gious organizations to establish places of worship and to train clergy. The Govern-
 ment respects these rights in practice. However, the law restricts the activities of
 nonnative religious orgnizations. There is no official state religion. Religious orga-
 nizations are required to register with local authorities and with the Government's
 Committee for Religious Affairs, a process that generally takes about 1 month.
 The Government initiated an attempt to mediate the ongi    spute among com-
 peting churches claiming to be "the Ukrainian Orthodox Church." The Government
 proposed establishing a committee, the National Council of Churches, for inter-
 confessional consultations to he headed by a deputy Prime Minister, which would
 hold an interreligious forum in 1997. This initiative is now under discussion by the
 churches. The Government moved to reduce church utility fees and rental payments,
 to exempt churches from the land tax, and to expedite the return of religious build-
 ings to their former owners. However, implementation of a 1992 decree on restitu-
 tion of religious community property seized during the Soviet era remains stalled.
 Jewish congregations in 33 towns and cities have negotiated successfully with local
 authorities for worship space. A Kiev arbitration court in September decided in
 favor of transferring title of the former Kiev Central Synagogue, which in Soviet
 times was used as a Iuppet theater, to a Chabad Hasidic congregation. While the
 theater directorship plans to appeal, the decision sets an important precedent for
 the jmdiciars role in religious property restitution. The Government expanded al-
 readfy significant efforts to ensure that pigrm  of the Bratslav Hasidic sect were
 able to visit the tomb of their founding rabbiin the city of Uman on the occasion
 of the Jewish New Year. A breakthrough agreement was signed between representa-
 ives of the sect, a local Jewish community organization, and the local government
 to build a religious center and museum at the site.
 A 1993 amendment to the 1991 law restricts the activities of nonnative religious
 organizations. It requires that members of the clergy, preachers, teachers, and other
 foreign citizen representatives of foreign organizations preach, administer religious
 ordinances, or practice other canonical activities only in those religious organiza-
 tions which invited them to U    e and with official approval of the governmental
 body that registered the statutes and the articles of the pertinent religious organiza-
 tion."
 In addition local officials have occasionally impeded the activities of foreign reli-
 gious workers. All regional administrations have departments responsible or reg-
 istration of various denominations and religious groups, and for supervision of com-
 pliance with the Law on the Freedom of Conscience and Religion. Neither the State
 Committee on Religious Affairs, nor its regional departments have the authority to
 deregister religious groups; they can be deregistered only by court decision.
 On February 12 a Kiev court sentenced three leaders of the "White Brotherhood"
 religious cult to jail terms ranging from 4 to 7 years (on charges of staging mass
 disorder and resisting authorities) for their involvement in the 1993 seizure of St.
 Sophia's Cathedral in Kiev, which resulted in a violent clash with police. A leader
 of the cult was granted early release under a mass amnesty, but the Supreme Court
 moved to prevent her release pending further consideration, apparently alarmed by
 her claims to be a living goddess.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Fredom of movement within the country is not restricted by law. How-
 ever, regulations impose a nationwide requirement to register at the workplace and
 place of residence in order to be eligible for social benefits, thereby complicating
 freedom of movement by limiting access to certain social benefits to the place where
 one is registered. People who move to other regions for work in the private sector,
 for instance, may not be eligible for registration and therefore may be denied formal
 access to free medical care and other services guaranteed by the State.
 While Ukraine continues to assure the right of return for all those it considers
 citizens, in practice this assurance does not include the right of return for all
 Ukrainian "ationals." The ambiguity of the citizenship law regarding the acquisi-
 tion of Ukrainian citizenship allows authorities to deny repatriation to nationals it
 
 
 1187
 considers undesirable. Persons born in Ukraine and living in Ukraine at the time
 of independence are considered citizens. Dual citizenship is not recognized.
 Citizens who wish to travel abroad are able to do so freely, although exit visas
 are still required for most Ukrainian citizens. The Government may deny passports
 to individuals with access to state secrets, but a denial can be appealed. In two in-
 stances, exit visas for the purpose of emigration were denied on grounds that the
 requesting individuals had had access to state secrets. However, both subsequently
 let Ukraine on tourist visas.
 The Government has not supported a foreign-funded program to facilitate the
 travel of some emigrants who qualify for resettlement as refugees. Some 260 000 Ta-
 tars have returned from exile to Crimea, mainly from Central Asia. The Crimean
 Tatar leadership has complained that their community has not received adequate
 assistance in resettling and that an onerous process of acquiring citizenship has ex-
 cluded many of them from participating in elections and from the right to take part
 in privatization of land and state assets. The Crimean election law provides Cri-
 mean Tatars with a quota of seats in the Crimean legislature.
 Ukraine is not a party to the 1951 United Nations Convention on the Status of
 Refugees or its 1967 Protocol. Its treatment of refugees is governed by the 1993 Law
 on Refugees, which entitles refugees to all the benefits accorded to citizens. Accord-
 ing to international observers, the Government demonstrated a positive attitude to-
 ward those claiming refugee status. A total of 823 Afghans were given refugee sta-
 tus during 1996, and a commitment has been made to award refugee status to all
 Afghans who arrived in Ukraine before 1995. In cooperation with the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Government is in the process of establish-
 ing refugee receiving centers in Vinnitsa and Luhansk. Instances of police harass-
 ment of certain categories of refugees appear to have diminished during the year.
 The Government has not established a policy on first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised this right in 1994, when they elected a new President, Leonid
 Kuchma, who replaced incumbent, Leonid Kravchuk, and elected a new Parliament
 representing a wide range of parties and ideologies. Because the current election
 law requires a minimum of a 50 percent voter turnout for elections to be valid, over
 30 seats of the 450 seat legislature remain unfilled. The Parliament decided to hold
 no more by-elections for a year in the 24 constituencies where voter turnout has
 failed to reach the minimum threshold on two or more occasions. During several
 parliamentary by-elections, human rights groups received complaints of irregular-
 itie  especially in rural constituencies. The Central Election Commission invali-
 dated the results in only one case, a by.-election in Lviv. The winner, Olga Kolinko,
 Deputy Prosecutor General and an anticorruption campaigner, alleged that the deci-
 sion was politically motivated and appealed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme
 Court was still hearing the case at year's end. According to the new Constitution,
 the Central Election Commission, not the Parliament, will decide the ultimate valid-
 ity of future election results.
 Women are active in political life but hold a disproportionately small percentage
 of offices. Women hold 16 of the 450 seats in Parliament. Only four women hold cab-
 inet-rank posts. The 18-member Constitutional Court has 2 female members. The
 provincial governors are all men. There are more women in local and oblast govern-
 ments than at higher levels of government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed local and international human rights groups to operate
 freel, although sme groups have been denied formal government rgitration
 making it harder for them to obtain accreditton to Official events and more dif-
 ficult to register bank accounts and other financial asec  of their organizations.
 The Union of Councils for Soviet Jewry and Amnesty International have active of-
 fices in Kiev. The Government also welcomed vists by foreign human rights orgn-
 zations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The new Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other
 grounds; however, due in part to the absence of an effective judicial system, the
 Government has not been able effectively to enforce many of these provisions. Soci-
 etal anti-Semitism exists, and the Government has not prosecuted anti-Semitic acts
 under the law forbidding the sewing of interethnic hatred. It also has not prosecuted
 those responsible for sexual harassment or discrimination. Human rights experts
 
 
 1188
 
 also note that the authorities' frequent harassment of dark-skinned young men is
 based on stereotypes that people from the Caucasus are involved in criminal activ-
 ity.
 Women-While comprehensive information measuring the extent of violence
 against women is not readily available, survey results suggest that the problem is
 pervasive. The number of reported rapes and attempted rapes has increased by 80
 percent over recent years. Surveys indicate that most women who have been sub-
 jected to physical abuse or rape never report it to the police. A 1995 poll of 600
 women conducted by a women's organization in Kharkiv indicated that 10 to 15 per-
 cent had been raped and over 25 percent subjected to physical abuse over the course
 of their lifetimes. Hot lines, shelters, and other practical support for victims of do-
 mestic violence do not exist.
 Separate statistics on prosecutions for wife beating or on average sentences are
 not available. Government representatives have acknowledged that when violence
 occurs the authorities often exert pressure on women to drop charges against their
 husbands in order to preserve the family. The low official incidence of reported
 crimes against women is mirrored by the lack of media attention to the subject.
 Many women's groups place a high priority on the issue but find it a difficult prob-
 lem to combat.
 Sexual trafficking in women to Western Europe, Turkey, and the Middle East is
 reputedly common. The problem has not been addressed by the Government. The
 authorities do not prosecute men for engaging women in the explosively growing
 sector of sexually exploitative work.
 Labor law provides for equal rights for men and women, including equal pay for
 equal work, a principle that is generally observed. A controversial provision in the
 new Constitution bars women from hard labor and hazardous industries. Many
 women's advocates fear that it may be used to bar women from the best paying
 blue-collar jobs. Women are much more likely to be laid off than men. Government
 statistics report that over 70 percent of all registered unemployed are women, and
 it is estimated that women represent up to 90 percent of all newly unemployed per-
 sons.
 Few women attain top managerial positions in government or in state and private
 industry. According to government statistics, 69.2 percent of Ukraine's 213,000 state
 administration jobs are held by women, including 45.2 per cent of the managerial
 positions. However, of the highest "first" and "second" category offices, only 5.6 per-
 cent in central or local governments are filled by women. (These numbers do not
 include the "power ministries"-the Ministries of Defense, Internal Affairs, Foreign
 Affairs, and the SBU.) Educational opportunities for women have generally been
 equal to those enjoyed by men, and they remain so. By law pregnant women and
 mothers with small children enjoy paid maternity leave until their children reach
 the age of 3, a privilege women value but one which is used as a justification to
 exclude women from responsible or career track jobs.
 Children.-The Government is publicly committed to the defense of children's
 rights. Because of the deepening economic crisis, however, it has struggled to imple-
 ment its agenda. The Government provides public education for children, which is
 compulsory to the age of 15 years. In principle there is free health care for children
 with special benefits for children affected by the Chornobil nuclear accident.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children. Public concern over the fate of
 children adopted by foreigners triggered an amendment to the adoption law provid-
 ing for thorough court examination of each case and followup monitoring of the chil-
 dren's well-being.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled,
 but, especially with the economic crisis, the Government has been unable to support
 programs targeted at increasing opportunities for the disabled. The law mandates
 access to buildings for the disabled, but it is poorly enforced.
 Religious Minorities.--Jews, the second largest religious minority in the country,
 have expanded opportunities to pursue their religious and cultural activities, but
 anti-Semitic incidents continue to occur. The Government has protected the rights
 of the Jewish community and speaks out against anti-Semitism. There are freely op-
 erating Jewish cultural centers and educational institutions, including several col-
 legs. However, some ultranationalist Ukrainian groups, like UNA-UNSO and DSU
 ("National Independence of Ukraine"), circulate anti-Semitic tracts. Anti-Semitic ar-
 ticles ontinue to appear in a few local newspapers, especially in western Ukraine
 and Kiev. The Lviv newspaper "For a Free Ukraine" and the Kiev-based "Evening
 Kiev" regularly publish anti-Semitic diatribes, but have not been prosecuted under
 the law forbidding the sowing of interethnic hatred. The National Conference on So-
 viet Jewry and Union of Councils reported that anti-Semitic incidents continued in
 
 
 1189
 some regions. Union of Councils monitors have reported that death threats were
 made against Jews in Kharkiv.
 Some Jewish cemeteries have been vandalized. On the eve of Hitler's birthday,
 the grave of a famous rabbi from Berdichev was desecrated. The problem of post-
 1940 demolition of or construction on Jewish cemeteries, both by Nazi occupiers and
 by the Soviet government, manifested itself during the year. In many instances
 Ukrainian officials inherited cases of Jewish cemetery land having been appro-
 priated for other uses in the intervening years, as Soviet law permitted reuse of
 cemetery land 25 years after the final burial in the cemetery. The most problematic
 case, that of the historic Jewish cemetery in Lviv, saw its last burial in the 19th
 century, total ruin by Nazi forces in 1942, and construction of a market on the land
 by Soviet authorities in 1947-1964. Similarly, in Berdichev private garages had
 been constructed atop burial grounds; and in Mliniv a hotel and _arking lot en-
 croach on a cemetery site. Local government officials have responded with varying
 degrees of concern and immediacy. The Government quickly addressed the issue at
 the presidential level, issuing an order that all construction or privatization on the
 land of Jewish cemeteries be immediately frozen. Negotiations began late in the
 year to reach an ultimate resolution of the problem.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-With some important exceptions, there are
 only isolated cases of ethnic discrimination in Ukraine. The new Constitution pro-
 vides for "the free development, use and protection of the Russian language and
 other minority languages in Ukraine." This compromise builds on a 1991 Law on
 National Minorities, which played an instrumental role in preventing ethnic strife
 by allowing individual citizens to use their respective national languages in conduct-
 ing prsnal business and by allowing minority groups to establish their own
 schools. Russian speakers, who predominate in eastern Ukraine, complained about
 the increased use of Ukrainian in schools and in the media. They claim that their
 children are disadvantaged when taking academic entrance examinations, since all
 applicants are required to take a Ukrainian language test.
 With the exception of two regions, there is no evidence of serious ethnic tension.
 In some parts of western Ukraine, small Russian, Jewish, and other minority groups
 credibly accuse some local Ukrainian ultranationalists of fostering ethnic hatred and
 printing anti-Semitic tracts. They also charge that local authorities have not taken
 action against those who foment ethnic hatred. In Crimea, Ukrainian and Tatar mi-
 norities credibly complain of discrimination by the Russian majority and demand
 that the Ukrainian and Tatar languages be given equal treatment to Russian. The
 Ukrainian community in Crimea has criticized the national Government for tolerat-
 ing radical anti-Ukrainian and Russian chauvinistic groups on the peninsula. An in-
 vestigation into the 1995 riots after the killing of two Tatar market vendors, which
 left four Tatars dead, ended inconclusively. While the Crimean Government, plead-
 ing insufficient funds, did not assent to requests from the Tatar community for as-
 sistance in reestablishing its cultural heritage through Tatar languae ublications
 and educational institutions, the central Government is working with the UNHCR,
 the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the International Or-
 ganization for Migration on support for the Tatar community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The new Constitution provides for the right to join
 trade unions to defend "professional, social and economic interests." Under the new
 Constitution, all trade unions have equal status, and no government permission is
 required to establish a trade union. The 1992 Law on Citizens' Organizations (which
 includes trade unions) stipulates noninterference by public authorities in the activi-
 ties of these organizations, which have the right to establish and join federations
 on a voluntary basis. In principle all workers and civil servants (including members
 of the armed forces) are free to form unions. In practice the Government discourages
 certain categories of workers (e.g., nuclear power plant employees) from doing so.
 The successor to the Soviet trade unions, known as the Federation of Trade
 Unions (FPU), has begun to work independently of the Government and has been
 vocal in opposing draft legislation that would restrict the right to strike. The FPU
 urged Par iament to adopt a new trade union law to replace old Soviet-era legisla-
 tion. It has defended strike organizers from the Donbass coal mines who were
 charged with rovoking civil disorder during strikes in July. As during the Soviet
 era, most FPU affiliates work closely with management. Enterprise managers are
 free to join the FPU. The FPU has no official or legal relationship with any political
 party.
 Independent unions now provide an alternative to the official unions in most sec-
 tors of the economy. Some, such as the Independent Miners' Union of Ukraine
 (NPGU), and unions representing pilots, civil air traffic controllers, locomotive engi-
 
 
 1190
 neer, and aviation ground crews have formed an umbrella organization, the Na-
 tional Federation of Trade Unions of Ukraine.
 The new Constitution provides for the right to strike 'to defend one's economic
 and social interests." The Constitution says that strikes must not jeopardize na-
 tional security, public health, or the rights and liberties of others. The Law on Labor
 Conflict Resolution does not extend this right to members of the armed forces, civil
 and security services, and employees of "continuing process plants" (e.g., metallur-
 gical factories). The iaw prohibits strikes that "may infringe on the basic needs of
 the population" (e.g., rail and air transportation). Strikes based on political demands
 are also illegal. The Government has relied on the prosecutors and courts to deal
 with strikes it considers illegal.    o     nal leaders were
 Following a protracted miners'prtest odwaesever by blocking
 detained pending trial on criminal charges of disrupting pubiore  yloig
 rads and railways during the Donbass strike in July. The headquarters of the
 "Workers' Strike Committee," a loose labor organization in the coal sector in
 Donetsk, was searched and foribly closed. On Akugust 20 the oblast arbitration
 court ordered it disbanded. The leader of the strike committee, Mlkhail Krylov, was
 arrested and later released on parole. The strike committee leaders have since de-
 fied the banning order. The NPGU leaders in the coal mining town of Krasnodon
 were found guilty of promoting public disorder and released with suspended sen-
 tences. In April a leader of the Independent Miners' Trade Union (NPG) of the
 Donbass coal mining region, Nykolay Volynko, was assaulted by unidentified assail-
 ants. The NPG of Donbass blamed opponents of the union for the assault.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies: The NPGU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Colectively.-The law on enterprises states
 that joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues concerning wages,
 working conditions, andi the rights and duties of management at the enterprise
 level, vrain spheres of responsibility frequently impede the collective bargain-
 ing process. The Government, in agment with trade unions, establishes wages in
 eac industrial sector and invites all unions to participate in the negotiations.
 The manner in which the collective bargaining law is applied prejudices the bar-
 gaining process against the independent unions and favors the official unions (affili-
 ates of the FPU). Most workers are never informed that they are not obligated to
 join the official union. Renouncing membership in the official union and joining an
 independent union can he bureaucratically onerous and is typically discouraged by
 management. The collective bargaining law prohibits antiunion discrimination.
 Under the law disputes are supposed tobe resolved by the courts. There have been
 cases in which such disputes lave not been settled in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 17 years. In certain nonhazardous industries, however, enterprises may negotiate
 with the Government to hire employees between 14 and 17 years of age, with the
 consent of one parent. The new Constitution provides for general secondary edu-
 cation. School attendance is compulsory to the age of 15, a regulation vigorously en-
 forced by the Ministry of Education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor.-During the year the Government raised the
 minimum   monthly wage and pension in stages from $0.30 to $8.80 (15 hryvnas),
 which does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The offi-
 cial poverty line is now about $40 (68.1 %vnas) er month. It is estimated that
 some 50 per cent of the population officially lives below that line, although the prac-
 tice of underreporting sources of income is widespread. Inflation was reduced signifi-
 cantly to an annual rate of around 47 per cent (down from 182 per cent in 1995)
 and is declining further.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, a 24-hour day of rest
 per week, and at least 15 days of paid vacation per year. Stagnation in some indus-
 tries (e.g., defense) significantly reduced the workweek for some categories of work-
 ers.
 The Constitution and other laws contain occupational safety and health stand-
 ards, but these are frequently ignored in practice. Lax safety standards caused
 many serious mine accidents, resulting in 243 deaths over the first 8 months of the
 year. This compares with 358 deaths for all of 1995, representing a considerable in-
 crease in the ratio of fatalities per ton of coal extracted in light of decreasing coal
 output. In theory workers have a legal right to remove themselves from dangerous
 work situations without jeopardizing continued employment. In reality, however,
 
 
 1191
 
 independent trade unionists report that asserting this right would result in retalia-
 tion or perhaps dismissal by management.
