Ukraine
As a result of dramatic political and economic developments in the former Soviet Union in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Ukraine, often in the center of these developments, re-acquired its independence and became a sovereign state. Ukraine's transition to statehood was quick, peaceful and democratic. On August 24, 1991, following the failed coup against the Gorbachev government, the Ukrainian Parliament adopted a declaration of independence. On December 1, 1991, 90% of the Ukrainian voters ratified this declaration and, by a vote of 62%, elected the country's first president, Leonid Kravchuk, former chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament.
The State Department's 1 992 report is the first report providing an account of human rights practices in Ukraine since the country acquired its independence. Previous reports covered the human rights situation in the Soviet Union, where Ukraine was one of fifteen constituent republics. The report gives a detailed picture of the complex political, legal and economic processes affecting the new nation. Overall, the report describes accurately a much improved human rights situation in Ukraine. The discussion below supplements the information contained in the report and notes factors which will affect future observance of human rights in Ukraine.
The report discusses accurately several cases where the Ukrainian government sought to stifle political criticism. It mentions, for example, President Krav-chuk's threat to expel foreigners from Ukraine if they are found to engage in
"activity that undermines the country's unity, political stability, and ethnic harmony." Not mentioned in the report were several other cases of the government's suppression of dissent or criticism. For example, as reported by the UN Commission on Human Rights, the Lawyers Committee and the staff of the U.S. Helsinki Commission, the authorities revoked the license to practice law of Leonid Kurgan-sky, a Ukrainian lawyer and human rights advocate, as a direct result of his human rights activities and his handling of politically sensitive cases. Mr. Kurgansky was also reported to have received death threats from the Ukrainian authorities. Also, Helsinki Watch reported that in October, government officials opened an investigation against two individuals, Vladimir Kniazhitskii, a journalist, and Valentina Yerofeeva, on charges of slandering the state.
The authorities also sought to obstruct public demonstrations on several occasions. The staff of the U.S. Helsinki Commission reported that in September, President Kravchuk's representative in Kiev refused to let buses carrying demonstrators from western Ukraine into Kiev, preventing them from staging a demonstration in front of the Parliament. According to several reports, some individuals were beaten by militia. Similarly, as noted in the report, in October, several students engaged in a political demonstration in Kiev were assaulted and arrested by the police, as were several journalists covering the event.
The Ukrainian government also controls much of the media and the press.
401
Ukraine
The report correctly points out that the government subsidizes most major newspapers and, thus, maintains effective control over the information they publish. Combined with the government's direct control and censorship of radio and television programs, this situation reinforces the government's ability to effectively deny the dissemination of alternative political views.
The report fails to discuss several specific incidents that tended to reduce freedom of expression. One of several disturbing developments in Ukraine was the government's refusal to register the union of journalists. Also, as mentioned above, the State Prosecutor's Office opened a criminal case against the journalist Vladimir Kniazhitskii, charging that he slandered President Kravchuk in a newspaper article.
On a more positive note, and contrary to the report's assertion that "there is no Ukrainian law protecting freedom of speech and press," a November law "On Information" provides that Ukrainian citizens have the right to free and unhampered access to information from foreign sources, including television and radio broadcasts and the press. This right cannot "violate the collective, political, economic, social, spiritual, ecological or other rights, freedoms, and legal interests of other citizens or the rights and interests of juridical persons." The precise meaning of this provision remains to be seen.
It is surprising that the report does not discuss the June 26 state of emergency law. This law has a potentially wide-ranging impact on human rights
guarantees and merits serious analysis by the State Department. It specifies when a state of emergency can be declared in Ukraine, with consequent suspension of major constitutional and political rights. According to the law, a state of emergency may be declared by the Parliament or the president (subject to the Parliament's approval) in cases of natural disasters, massive violations of law and order, attempts to seize governmental authority or change the constitutional order by violent means, and the government's need to restore constitutional law and order.
Under a state of emergency, the government may restrict the public's freedom of movement, prohibit meetings and rallies, prohibit strikes, institute a curfew, suspend the activities of political parties, institute censorship and limit newspaper editions, expel individuals who are disturbing the peace (at their own expense), prohibit the production and distribution of information that "might destabilize the situation," and institute special rules and restrictions on the means of communication. During a state of emergency, no elections to the Parliament and no amendment of the Constitution and the election rules are permitted.
The Parliament's broad authority to declare a state of emergency is not subject to judicial or executive review or appeal. This fact is particularly troubling because all current members of the Ukrainian Parliament were elected prior to Ukraine's independence, under the rules established by the Soviet Union and the Communist party. In fact, many of the parliamentarians are former Communists who do not welcome and possibly oppose
402
Ukraine
the economic and legal reforms being implemented in Ukraine.
The report notes the developing state of the Ukrainian legal system, but does not reflect accurately the extent of problems in the legal and judicial systems. Limited judicial independence, overburdened courts and lack of protection of defendants' rights are just some of the major problems. The government is in the process of drafting a new constitution and is working on major judicial and legal reforms. The future will show whether these reforms, if enacted, will be able to correct the deficiencies in the administration of justice.
The report provides an accurate account of Ukraine's generally respectful and encouraging treatment of its national minorities. It mentions one example of an attempted arson against a U.S. rabbi in Kiev. The report accurately notes that there were a number of other anti-Semitic incidents, yet ignores anti-Gypsy attacks that took place in Odessa on May 13. According to Human Rights Watch (citing a report in tzvestia), a mob of 2,500 people attacked 21 houses occupied by Gypsies. Sixteen houses were destroyed as a result of this attack.
The above incidents are particularly disturbing because apparently no one has been apprehended in any of these attacks. Although the Ukrainian government has been following a policy of inclusion of its national minorities, its inability or unwillingness to enforce laws and policies raises questions about its commitment and the current impunity enjoyed by those responsible for the attacks can only encourage further violations.
The report does not discuss the state of psychiatry in Ukraine. Psychiatric practice in the country is essentially the same as in the former Soviet Union. While reforms are being contemplated, in practice the medical training, hospital conditions, patients' rights, legal norms and many other aspects of the system remain largely unchanged. Robert van Voren, the general secretary of the Geneva Initiative on Psychiatry and a coordinator of Western Aid to Psychiatry for the Ministry of Health in Ukraine, reported on many troubling aspects of Ukrainian psychiatric practice.
The report does not acknowledge a significant positive development in the human rights practices in Ukraine: in December 1991, Ukraine amended its criminal code to eliminate the prohibition of sexual activity between consenting homosexual adults.
In its discussion of freedom of religion, the report does not mention a significant positive development in Ukraine related to military service. In February, the Ukrainian parliament Dassed a law on alternative military service pursuant to which persons whose religious beliefs do not allow them to serve in combat can perform public work or serve in a non-combat capacity.
While Ukraine has made important progress over the 12 months since its independence, much more work remains to be done to achieve a thriving and stable democratic and rights-respecting society. As the most serious human rights violations of the former Soviet state are being eradicated, the new economic and environmental challenges
403
Ukraine
facing Ukraine threaten to derail or hold back the progress achieved so far. The rampant inflation, unemployment and loss of purchasing power not only diminish the quality of human life but also threaten to weaken the fragile democratic processes which began in 1991.
In such a delicate time, human rights considerations must continue to be at the forefront. The broad constitutional and legislative enactments being developed by the Ukrainian government must be followed by a more specific regulatory framework and by the government's willingness to fully implement and enforce its laws and regulations. Some of the differences between Ukrainian policy and practice are due to the developing nature of the country's political system and the economic challenges facing Ukraine. Others may reflect the deep rooted practices of the former totalitarian regime whose officials still hold key legislative and executive posts. In either case,-implementation and enforcement of the human rights framework being developed by the Ukrainian government is essential to a functioning democratic system.
404
