Ukraine
A November presidential election that was neither free nor fair plummeted
Ukraine into its deepest political crisis since gaining independence
in 1991. At this writing the two leading candidates, Prime Minister
Viktor Yanukovich and opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko, had
both claimed victory. Hundreds of thousands of protesters had occupied
the streets of Kiev, and parliament had adopted a vote of no confidence
in Yanukovich. Initiatives in several regions in eastern Ukraine to seek
autonomy should the opposition candidate win the presidency had
raised concern of a possible break-up of the country. While the
Ukrainian political elite, together with foreign mediators, were looking
hard for a way out of the crisis, the danger of the situation turning violent
remained very real. To their credit, the authorities had to date not
cracked down on demonstrators.
On December 3, 2004, the Supreme Court, citing allegations of widespread
fraud in the vote, ruled that new elections had to be held by
December 26.
The crisis, however, was entirely preventable. Its roots lay in the government’s
persistent violations of basic human rights norms, and political
freedoms in particular. For years, under the leadership of President
Kuchma, the government imposed ever stricter controls on media coverage,
repeatedly sought to manipulate electoral processes, and ignored
widespread popular discontent. By doing so, it has undermined legitimate
avenues for people to express their grievances in a meaningful way.
The government’s blatant attempts to manipulate the presidential vote
in favor of Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich—notwithstanding a clear
popular preference for opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko—served
to convince many Ukrainians that mass street protests are their only
hope of being heard.
The Ukrainian government has a poor track record on press freedom.
The government or individuals close to the president own most major
media outlets, including almost all television stations. It blatantly uses
its sway over these media to influence their coverage of the news, in
part by issuing instructions to news editors, sometimes in writing,
detailing what news stories should be covered and how. As a result, the
government has received a disproportionate amount of positive coverage
in most media, while opposition parties and figures have struggled
to have their voices heard. Under international pressure, the authorities
have taken some steps to address press freedom problems—most
notably by adopting a law defining censorship and criminalizing government
interference with the press. But the government’s continued
manipulation of the media strongly suggests that these were not genuine
attempts to ensure a free press.
The independent—and often opposition minded—media consists primarily
of newspapers and internet publication that have a small readership.
Yet, attacks on independent journalists have been frequent and
President Kuchma was personally implicated in the worst one: the disappearance
and murder of opposition journalist Georgiy Gongadze. In
2000, a former presidential body guard made public hours of secretly
taped conversations between Kuchma and his inner circle. On one of
the tapes, Kuchma appeared to order Gongadze’s murder. The president
has denied involvement in the murder but to date his administration
has hindered a full investigation. In 2004, there were repeated
attacks on opposition journalists. In June, Ichvan Kotsanik, a cameraman
for an opposition-linked television station, was beaten into a coma
and died several days later. It remains unclear who was behind the
attack.
In the run-up to the presidential elections, the authorities made extensive
use of their administrative resources and the media under their
control to promote their favored candidate, Viktor Yanukovich. In
August, the Committee of Voters of Ukraine, a nongovernmental watchdog group, stated in a report that government funds were being
used to support Yanukovich’s candidacy, and that local officials had
forced state employees, such as teachers, to take part in pro-Yanukovich
rallies. As in previous elections, political opponents have faced harassment
and intimidation. Several months prior to the elections, Viktor
Yushchenko suddenly fell ill after what he called an attempt by the
authorities to poison him. The authorities have denied the charge and
the hospital that treated Yushchenko has not confirmed that he was poisoned.
Entrenched Human Rights Problems
Ukraine has been plagued by numerous human rights problems that
require a structural approach on the part of the government. While it
has begun to act on some of these issues, many remain unaddressed.
Torture and ill-treatment continues to be a significant problem in police
detention and prisons in Ukraine. Ukraine’s human rights ombudsman
receives numerous complaints of torture from criminal suspects and
estimates that 30 percent of all detainees may become victims of torture
or ill-treatment by law enforcement agents. Ill-treatment has resulted in
permanent physical damage to many victims, and in the most severe
cases, resulted in death. In the vast majority of cases, the perpetrators of
torture are not investigated or prosecuted for their crimes. Prison conditions
in Ukraine continue to be poor. Prisons are overcrowded, and
prisoners have insufficient access to food and health care. As in many
other former-Soviet nations, tuberculosis is widespread in prisons.
Ukraine has one of the fastest growing HIV/AIDS epidemics in the
world, and human rights violations are fueling its growth. Widespread
discrimination against members of high risk groups—injection drug
users, sex workers, and men who have sex with men—prevents people
from seeking preventative health services and thus increases their risk of
contracting HIV. There is also a history of discrimination against people infected with HIV. Although the government has made a commitment
to fighting the spread of HIV/AIDS and plans to distribute generic
antiretroviral drugs, these steps alone are insufficient to stem the epidemic.
Ukraine has recently legalized the use of methadone, widely regarded as
the single most effective means of treating opiate dependency. Although
the medical and public health establishment has been generally supportive,
resistance to methadone by Ukrainian law enforcement bodies have
so far prevented its use. One critically important outcome of this situation
is that many drug users living with HIV will not benefit from
expanding access to antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, as they will be barred
from receiving the major tool necessary to support treatment adherence.
Women face severe discrimination in Ukraine’s workforce. Men hold a
disproportionate number of managerial positions and receive better pay
than women in comparable jobs. Discrimination is especially prevalent
in the job market, where women’s access to high paying or high prestige
jobs is limited in both the public and private sectors due to discriminatory
recruitment processes. Many women are forced into lower paying
jobs or remain jobless—women make up 80 percent of the unemployed
in Ukraine. Some women, frustrated by the lack of opportunities at
home, seek employment outside Ukraine and become victims of trafficking
into forced labor abroad, including forced sex work. Women are
also victims of widespread domestic abuse.
Ukraine is both a transit point and a point of origin for human trafficking.
Ukrainian women and girls are sent to the Middle East and other
European countries and forced to be sex workers, while Ukrainian men
are sent to other parts of Europe and North America for forced labor.
Many victims of human trafficking from Moldova and Asian nations
travel through Ukraine, on their way to countries where they will be
exploited. The past year has seen an increase in the number of trafficked children, many of them orphans. The government of Ukraine has
recently taken steps to reduce human trafficking using increased prosecution
of suspected traffickers and programs to help victims. Despite
this progress, however, Ukraine still does not meet international standards
meant to fight trafficking, and the problem persists.
Key International Actors
The international community has closely monitored the presidential
elections. With the exception of the monitors from the Commonwealth
of Independent States, which is made up of twelve former Soviet States,
international monitors found that the presidential vote had fallen short
of international standards. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe stated that the second round “did not meet a
considerable number of [international] commitments for democratic
elections.” The E.U., U.S., Council of Europe, and NATO have all
expressed concern over widespread fraud and have urged a peaceful
solution to the political crisis. The E.U. has strongly endorsed a new
vote as the best way forward. 