UKRAINE
As a resuit of the dramatic political and economic developments in the former Soviet Union in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Ukraine reacquired its independence and became a sovereign state. Ukraine's transition to statehood was quick, peaceful and democratic. On August 24, 1991, following the failed coup against the Gorbachev government, the Ukrainian Parliament adopted a declaration of independence. On December 1, 1991, Ukrainian voters ratified this declaration and elected Leonid Kravchuk, former chairman of Ukrainian Parliament, as the country's first president.
The State Department's 1993 report is its second account of human rights practices in Ukraine since independence. It gives a detailed picture of the complex political, legal and economic processes affecting the new nation. Overall, the report describes accurately an improving human rights situation. The discussion below supplements the information contained in the report and notes some of the factors that will affect the future observance of human rights in Ukraine.
The report discusses accurately the state of fi"ee speech and press fi-eedom in Ukraine, giving appropriate emphasis to "significant impediments to the exercise of these freedoms." According to the report, these impediments include the lack of independent funding and public support for independent media; limited access to the media for candidates for public office; and a Ukrainian government decree categorizing newsprint as "strategic" material.
However, the report does not emphasize the effect of state sponsorship of certain newspapers. Clearly, state subsidies for pro-government newspapers potentially compromise thefr credibility as objective sources of news, analysis and comment. Conversely, as independent newspapers are left to fend for themselves, the Ukrainian government is clearly exacting a price from those who dare criticize or oppose its policies. Such policies could have a chilling effect on the development of a free and independent media.
The report accurately notes that the "lack of independent funding and of public support for independent media make it difficult for opposition leaders to disseminate their views widely." It fails to note, however, that while opposition leaders appear on state-run broadcast media, the overwhelming majority of the broadcast time is reserved for the promotion of President Kravchuk's views and policies. Such state support infringes the rights of political opponents to have their views equally disseminated among the Ukrainian populace.
Further, the report correctly notes that the placement of newsprint in the category of "strategic material" gives the Ukrainian government "control over the distribution of all paper." But it fails to emphasize that such control could give the state unlimited power to stifle independent or opposition media as it may, pursuant
372
UKRAINE
to the terms of the decree, hmit the distribution of newsprint to certain newspapers. The report states that "generally paper shortages appear to affect alb papers regardless of political orientation", but does not note the lack of safeguards in the decree to ensure that political orientation will not be used as a criterion for distribution priorities during times of shortage.
The report also completely fails to mention the disturbing conviction in November 1993 of Alexander Volosov, editor of the newspaper Orientir, who was found guilty of libel and slander and sentenced to four years in prison with an additional four years suspended. The case arose out of an article in which he accused a public prosecutor of corruption. (The sentence was subsequently reduced to two and a half years after Voloslov appealed the court's decision in January 1994.)
The report does not adequately consider the effect on human rights of regional and economic issues in Ukraine. Ukraine's regional diversity presents a major social and political challenge to the coxmtry's leadership. Further, the need to restructure the many highly inefficient and unprofitable industrial firms throughout Ukraine could lead to social tension and strife.
One example of such conflict was ignored by the report. In June 1993, coal miners from the eastern Ukrainian region of Donetsk went on strike against price increases. According to the Congressional Research Service, the strike leaders called for greater regional autonomy from Kiev, a referendum on the performance of President Kravchuk and the Ukrainian parliament, and more government financial support. The majority of mines went back to work after the miners were promised increases in subsidies, pay and benefits, and the Ukrainian government agreed to draft a new law on greater autonomy for four eastern regions — Donetsk, Luhansk, Dnipropetrovsk and Zaporizha.
The report could have mentioned one positive development in Ukraine's human rights practices. Amnesty International has reported that Ukraine became the first republic of the former Soviet Union to decriminalize homosexual acts between consenting adult males. Article 122 of the criminal code had previously made homosexual acts punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. Criminal responsibility is now limited to those engaging in sodomy with a minor, or with the use of physical violence, threats, or by taking advantage of the dependent condition of the other party.
The report accurately states that Ukraine continues to treat its ethnic minorities with respect and to make efforts toward the protection of the rights of its minorities. The report accurately notes that manifestations of anti-Semitism continue and specifically refers to the disturbing increase in the distribution of anti-Semitic posters and literature during 1993. The report makes reference to the situation of the Russian minority in Crimea but does not give it the attention it deserves as a potential region of ethnic strife. More than two-thirds of Crimea is
373
CRITIQUE 1993
populated by ethnic Russians, and since the demise of the Soviet Union a separatist movement has been gainmg strength there.
The State Department notes the developing state of the Ukrainian legal system, which continues to suffer from limited judicial independence, overburdened courts and a lack of protection for defendants' rights. As outlined below, the government continues to draft a new constitution and is working on major legal and judicial reforms. It remains uncertain whether these reforms, if enacted, will be able to ensure an independent judiciary, the fair adminisfration of justice and adherence to the rule of law.
The report notes that a parliamentary commission, formed in 1992 to prepare a new post-Soviet constitution had not completed its work by the end of 1993. But it fails to outline some of the concerns raised by experts who have reviewed and analyzed the draft. The Congressional Research Service reports that, "while some observers say the current draft is generally consistent with Western democratic values (sic) and the rule of law, others caution that clauses in the draft Constitution making guarantees of basic freedoms subject to provisions of (as-yet unpassed) laws leaves the door open to abuses. Opposition leaders call for the draft to be scrapped and a new constitution to be drawn up by a new constituent assembly". The report should have paid attention to such doubts about the effectiveness of the new Constitution.
The report also fails to mention the continued administration of the death penalty under the Ukrainian judicial system. While those drafting the Country Reports are specifically instructed that the death penalty does not per se constitute a violation of intemational human ri^ts law, there are grounds for serious concern about the due process rights of those executed, since the numbers of death sentences and executions are considered a state secret in Ukraine. The report might usefully have noted this disturbing fact.
The report states that, "The Ukrainian psychiatric community has begun to adopt more humane methods of treatment". It fails to note, however, that for the most part the practice of psychiatry in Ukraine remains essentially the same as it was in the former Soviet Union. While efforts are underway to improve medical fraining, hospital conditions, patients' rights and legal norms, many other aspects of the system remain unchanged,
While Ukraiae has continued to make important progress over the two years since its independence, much more remains to be done to build a stable democratic and rights-respecting society. As the most serious human rights violations of the former Soviet state are eradicated, the new economic and political challenges facing Ukraine continue to threaten to derail or hold back the progress that has been achieved so far. Rampant inflation, unemployment and the loss of purchasing power not only diminish the quality of human life but also threaten to weaken the fragile democratic processes that began in 1991.
374
UKRAINE
The broad constitutional and legislative changes being enacted by the Ukrainian government must be followed by a more specific regulatory framework and by the government's willingness to ftilly implement and enforce its laws and regulations. Some of the differences between Ukrainian policy and practice reflect the developing nature of the country's political system and the economic challenges facing it. Others may reflect the deep-rooted practices of the Soviet system whose former officials still hold key legislative and executive posts. Given this delicate situation, human rights considerations will continue to be of paramount concern. While the 1993 report is a generally accurate picture of the state of human rights in Ukraine, future reports will need to be attentive to the serious challenges that confront Ukraine's efforts to become a society based on the rule of law.
375
CRITIQUE 1993
