Ukraine
Another period of instability characterized political life in Ukraine in 2009.
Political scuffles between President Viktor Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yulia
Timoshenko continued through most of the year. In March Yushchenko proposed
a constitutional amendment that would restructure parliament into two chambers—
ostensibly the intent is that a bicameral parliament will better withstand
political crisis, but critics suggest that the amendment is also designed to limit
presidential power after Yushchenko’s term ends in 2010. On October 22, parliament
voted against the president’s proposal.
Relations with Russia continued to deteriorate. As 2008 drew to a close, tensions
erupted over a Russian gas pipeline to Europe that crosses Ukraine, prompting
the European Union to convene an emergency summit, held in January 2009,
dedicated to regional energy security. Although Russia and Ukraine eventually
reached a compromise, diplomatic disagreements aggravated political tension
between the countries. In August 2009 Russian president Dmitry Medvedev
accused the Ukrainian government of “anti-Russian” policies and declared that
he refused to work with the Ukrainian government as composed. Ukraine
responded by condemning Russia’s “empire complex.”
Despite some improvements, Ukraine’s overall human rights record remains poor,
with torture and ill-treatment in detention still commonplace. Hostility to asylum
seekers, hate attacks on ethnic minorities, and Ukraine’s staggering HIV/AIDS
epidemic are problems that the government still fails to address effectively.
Criminal Justice System
The Criminal Justice and Law Enforcement Authorities reform enacted in 2008
achieved some positive changes in 2009, in particular better treatment of mentally
ill detainees and improved adherence to due process requirements. However,
Ukraine’s criminal justice system is still plagued by a high number of arbitrary
detentions, ill-treatment in custody, corruption among law enforcement personnel,
and a weak judiciary.
Ukraine’s human rights groups report high numbers of forced confessions extracted
under torture, which are then allowed as evidence during trials. Impunity in
the police force is widespread. However, in 2009 mobile monitoring groups composed
of Ministry of Internal Affairs personnel and members of the public successfully
drew attention to poor conditions in custody. The monitoring groups
made 41 visits in the first six months of 2009, uncovering routine violations of
detention procedures such as failing to register arrests and to read detainees
their rights during arrest, as well as overcrowding and lack of natural light in cells.
As a result, by May 2009 more than 50 law enforcement officials had been convicted
of crimes related to abuse of power, including ill-treatment.
Treatment of Asylum Seekers and Refugees
With no clear migration policy and a flawed and restrictive refugee law that
results in only 3 percent of asylum seekers obtaining refugee status, Ukraine continues
to deny asylum seekers protection. However, the Department on Refugees
and Asylum-Seekers of the State Committee on Nationalities and Religion has
proposed legislation to address these shortcomings.
In 2009 Ukraine continued to refuse to grant refugee status to Chechens, since
Ukraine does not recognize war as grounds for granting refugee status. On
September 2, six people from the Democratic Republic of Congo, including at
least one who sought asylum, were returned two days after arriving in Kyiv. The
six were deported despite protests from representatives of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in Ukraine, who were not granted access to
them. The Ukrainian authorities cited an August 2009 law requiring persons from
Africa, Asia, and several countries of the former Soviet Union entering Ukraine to
have at least 12,620 hryvnia (approximately US$1,600), or risk being refused
entry. This requirement poses a significant new obstacle for asylum seekers in
Ukraine.
In 2009 Ukrainian authorities continued to comply with requests of other governments
that violate fundamental refugee rights. In June they provided the
Prosecutor General’s Office of Kazakhstan with confidential documents from the
refugee status applications of four Kazakhstan citizens, in direct violation of article
11 of the Ukrainian refugee law. As a result, Kazakhstan launched criminal cases against people who had provided, in support of the refugee applications,
evidence that the four had suffered persecution.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination
Physical assaults and attacks on immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers, foreign
students, Roma, and people of non-Slavic appearance persist in Ukraine. On
January 18, 2009, a young Nigerian man was stabbed to death, and police
promptly ruled out a racial motive without evidence supporting an alternate theory.
Ukraine continues to lack legislation on racially motivated crimes, and the current
civil and administrative anti-discrimination law does not provide proper protection
and access to justice for the victims of racially motivated abuses.
Crimean Tatars continue to endure discrimination, including unequal land allocation,
employment opportunities, and access to places of worship, and unavailability
of education in their native language. A group of Tatars held a months-long
demonstration in front of the government building in Kyiv to protest unequal
access to land ownership. On July 30 the protestors were attacked by a group of
young people while police looked on.
Health Issues and the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
The Ukrainian National AIDS Center reported 13,039 newly registered cases of HIV
infection in the first eight months of 2009, nearly half among injection drug
users. On March 19, parliament approved a national HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment program for 2009-13, aiming to provide treatment to 20,000 patients by
2013.
The government expanded provision of antiretroviral therapy (ART) for people living
with HIV/AIDS, and increased drug users’ access to medication-assisted treatment
(MAT) with methadone and buprenorphine (widely recognized as the most
effective means to treat opiate dependence and critical to HIV prevention and
treatment support for opioid-dependent drug users), though not on a scale sufficient
to address the need. As of November 1, 2009, 13,500 people living with
HIV/AIDS were receiving ART, and over 4,800 people were receiving MAT in 102 healthcare institutions in 26 regions of Ukraine. There is no MAT in prisons, however,
and limited access to ART.
In contrast, Ukraine has made little progress ensuring that patients who face
severe pain have adequate access to opioid medications like morphine. Due to
excessively restrictive narcotics regulations, tens of thousands of cancer and AIDS
patients are likely to suffer from severe pain unnecessarily because they cannot
get access to appropriate treatment.
Media Freedom
On June 9, 2009, parliament held the first reading of a draft law imposing criminal
liability for violations of public morality, sparking harsh criticism from media and
human rights groups concerned that overbroad or subjective definitions of the
term “public morality” could make editors and journalists vulnerable to criminal
prosecution for publishing otherwise protected speech.
There was welcome progress in the investigation into the murder of journalist
Georgy Gongadze. On July 21 Alexei Pukach, a former Ministry of Internal Affairs
official suspected of ordering Gongadze’s killing in 2000, was arrested after being
on the run for four years. He reportedly gave key evidence to investigators, including
names of other people involved in the murder.
Key International Actors
On February 9, 2009, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention released a
report on its 2008 visit to Ukraine. The report noted positive changes in the
detention practices of Ukraine’s law enforcement agencies, but expressed concern
at the high number of arbitrary detentions, the regular use of torture to
extract confessions, and the lack of a separate juvenile justice system.
During an April 2009 visit to Ukraine, Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, corapporteur
of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s Committee
on Legal Affairs and Human Rights, cautiously encouraged reform of the parliamentary
system in Ukraine. She also expressed regret that those who ordered
Georgy Gongadze’s murder had still not been brought to justice. The Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) recommended
in May that Ukraine sign and ratify the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of their Families. The
ECRI also noted problems in the response by Ukrainian law enforcement to racially
motivated crimes.
Procedural obstacles hindered the appointment of a new Ukrainian judge in the
European Court of Human Rights in 2009, requiring that judges be appointed ad
hoc to hear cases brought against Ukraine. The court has nearly 10,000 pending
applications against Ukraine, comprising 8.7 percent of all pending cases for the
first eight months of 2009.
United States Vice President Joe Biden visited Ukraine in July 2009 to reassure the
Ukrainian government of US support for Ukraine’s bid for NATO membership.
Biden also encouraged Ukraine to resolve the political crisis in the government,
to implement economic reforms to alleviate growing unemployment and inflation,
and to become less dependent on Russia for energy.
In 2009 the European Union introduced projects related to migration regulation
and equal labor policies in Ukraine. On the initiative of the European
Commission, an Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum was established, including
over 60 Ukrainian civil society actors.