Ukraine
The government was incapacitated by political crises for six months of 2006,
resulting in little progress in improving Ukraine’s key human rights problems and
dashing the hopes many had in the Orange Revolution’s promise of reform. While
civil society institutions operate mostly without government interference, police
abuse and violations of the rights of vulnerable groups—including migrants, asylum
seekers, and people living with or at risk of HIV/AIDS—continue to mar
Ukraine’s human rights record.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) found the 2006
parliamentary elections to be free and fair. In February the new parliament adopted
a vote of no-confidence in the government of Viktor Yushchenko; after much
political struggle a new government was formed in August headed by Viktor
Yanukovich, whom Yushchenko had defeated in the 2004 and 2005 presidential
elections.
Media Freedom and Freedom of Information
Ending government interference with the media remains one of the human rights
achievements of the Yushchenko presidency. But numerous, anonymous attacks
and threats persisted against journalists, particularly those based in Ukraine’s
provinces, who investigated or exposed corruption or other government malfeasance.
The US-based Committee to Protect Journalists concluded that these
attacks, and police reluctance in some cases to pursue the perpetrators, were
“helping to foster an atmosphere of impunity against independent journalists.”
Upon entering office in 2005, Yushchenko pledged to prioritize the investigation
into the unsolved kidnapping and murder of investigative journalist Georgy
Gongadze in 2000. Many considered progress on this a political litmus test of the
seriousness with which the new authorities were pursuing the restoration of the
rule of law in Ukraine. The trial of three police officers charged with the murder
began on January 9, 2006, in the Kiev Court of Appeals. The court closed parts of
the trial to the public after one of the defense lawyers said that the media presence
was harming the health of his client. Hearings were postponed several times
and, at this writing, the trial was ongoing. Media freedom activists expressed frustration that the court would not admit as evidence tape recordings implicating
high level government officials in Gongadze’s murder.
Torture and Conditions in Detention
Reports of torture and ill-treatment by police persisted, as did unduly long periods
of pretrial custody. Prison conditions in most facilities in Ukraine are
appalling; the most serious problems being overcrowding and lack of adequate
nutrition and medical care in prisons. There have been at least four reported
cases of prisoners attempting suicide to call attention to the poor conditions in
detention.
In March the European Court for Human Rights ruled in Melnik v. Ukraine that
overcrowded, unsanitary prison conditions and poor medical care contributed to
the illness of a prisoner and amounted to degrading treatment. The court also
faulted Ukraine for apparently failing to provide an effective mechanism for
inmates to complain about conditions in detention.
Human Rights Abuses Fueling the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
Ukraine’s HIV/AIDS epidemic is the worst in Europe and one of the fastest-growing
in the world. The Ukrainian government has taken a number of positive steps
to fight HIV/AIDS, chiefly in the area of legislative and policy reform. But these
important commitments are being undermined by widespread human rights
abuses against drug users, sex workers, and people living with HIV/AIDS in the
criminal justice and health systems.
Human Rights Watch’s research in 2005 and 2006 found that police subject drug
users and sex workers to physical and psychological pressure as a means to
extort money or information from them. These abuses, together with direct police
interference with the delivery of HIV prevention information and services, drive
those at highest risk of HIV/AIDS away from lifesaving services that the government
has pledged to provide. People living with and at high risk of HIV/AIDS also
face widespread discrimination in the health care system. They are denied medical
treatment, and face violations of their privacy.
The criminalization of possession of small amounts of narcotics further accelerates
HIV infection rates by driving those most vulnerable to HIV infection away
from prevention services. It also exposes many to health risks in prison that
would put them at risk of contracting HIV or that would exacerbate an existing HIV
infection. Methadone and buprenorphine, widely recognized as among the most
effective means to treat opiate dependence, are critical to prevent HIV among
injection drug users and to support antiretroviral treatment adherence for HIVpositive
injection drug users. Ukraine began to provide buprenorphine on a limited
basis in 2005. In 2006, the Ministry of Health worked with international health
experts and civil society organizations to address barriers to providing
methadone, but to date it is unavailable.
Migrants and Refugees
Migration and asylum issues remained high on the government’s agenda, particularly
in the context of its relationship with the European Union. The Ukrainian asylum
system barely functions due to a highly decentralized structure spanning several
government agencies and departments. Plans for a single migration system
to deal with all aspects of migration and asylum have progressed, but reform has
been slow, political interference in the system is common and abuses of migrants
and asylum seekers’ rights continue (see also chapter on EU externalization policy).
Ukrainian authorities in February deported 11 Uzbek asylum seekers without giving
them the opportunity to appeal their negative asylum determinations; nine
had previously registered as asylum seekers with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Ukraine. The forcible return of the Uzbeks
was a clear violation of Ukraine’s international obligation not to transfer any person
to a place where his life or freedom would be under threat or where he would
be at risk of torture. The government’s decision to return the men was widely condemned
by the international community.
With the accession to the EU of countries along Ukraine’s western border,
migrants increasingly transit through Ukraine to reach EU territory. Police and border
guards apprehend and detain undocumented migrants and asylum-seekers,
often in appalling conditions in detention facilities on the border. A large number of migrants who manage to cross the border are sent back to Ukraine in accordance
with Ukraine’s bilateral readmission agreements with Poland, Hungary, and
Slovakia.
In October 2006, the EU and Ukraine concluded a readmission agreement that
required Ukraine to readmit any undocumented third country national who transited
through Ukraine before gaining access to EU territory. Human rights and
refugee protection groups advocated for an agreement that would delay such
returns until Ukraine’s migration and asylum systems operated in conformity with
international human rights standards. The final agreement contained a two-year
“grace period” delaying such returns, but human right groups expressed concern
that it would take much longer for Ukraine to implement reforms to ensure the
rights of migrants and asylum seekers.
Human Trafficking and Discrimination against Women
Women continue to face gender-based employment discrimination and hold disproportionately
few senior positions in the government and private sector. No
women serve in the Cabinet of Ministers, and only one of 27 parliamentary committees
is headed by a woman. The government has a mixed record of progress in
combating discrimination. In May the minister of justice ordered all draft legislation
to undergo a gender analysis and formed an expert panel for this purpose.
Framework legislation on gender equality adopted in 2005 remains largely ineffective
because implementing legislation has not been enacted.
On November 21, 2005, the government launched a national campaign to combat
violence against women as part of a wider program under the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE).
Amendments to the criminal code adopted in January criminalize human trafficking
and seek to bring Ukraine in line with its international commitments.
Although the authorities created a 500-person anti-trafficking department, the
majority of convicted traffickers received probation instead of prison sentences
which a UN expert in October attributed to corruption in law enforcement and the
judiciary. The government adopted a multi-year policy to fight human trafficking
and took steps to raise awareness about trafficking, assist victims, and educate law enforcement. Despite these efforts, Ukraine remained a country of transit and
destination for large numbers of trafficked persons.
Key International Actors
The UN Human Rights Committee’s concluding observations on Ukraine’s periodic
report noted several positive government steps, such as the establishment of a
witness protection program, but expressed concerns in a wide range of areas,
including police mistreatment of detainees, the need to intensify efforts to fight
domestic violence, and the lack of transparency in the appointment of the
judiciary.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) agreed with other
international monitors in its assessment of the March elections as free and fair.
PACE also expressed concerns about the parliamentary crises and several human
rights problems but it noted “significant progress” by Ukraine in protecting
human rights and building democracy.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled on an increased number of
complaints against Ukraine in 2006. The court issued 160 judgments from
October 2005 to November 2006, compared to 64 in the same period the year
before.
Citing this improvement in the political process, in September the European
Commission proposed opening preliminary negotiations on an enhanced version
of its Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Ukraine.
In March, the US and Ukraine signed an agreement aimed at facilitating the country’s
eventual entry into the World Trade Organization. The US also removed trade
restrictions in place against Ukraine since the Cold War. The US Agency for
International Development (USAID) substantially increased the flow of aid to
Ukraine in 2006, budgeting over US$190 million in assistance.