Ukraine
Ukraine’s human rights record remained poor in 2012. Candidates and supporters
faced violence and harassment from authorities ahead of October parliamentary
elections. Opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko alleged ill-treatment in
prison, where she is serving a seven-year sentence, and two of her former political
allies were imprisoned. The government extradited two asylum seekers.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) activists faced violence and
harassment from nationalist groups. Parliament passed an anti-discrimination
law and revised laws protecting asylum seekers. The European Union, United
States,, and other countries criticized the country’s deteriorating human rights
situation.
Parliamentary Elections
Following the October 28 parliamentary elections, President Yanukovich’s Party
of Regions retained a majority of seats. The ultra-nationalist Svoboda party
made it into parliament for the first time, securing 9 percent of seats. The
absence of leading opposition figures as candidates marred the elections. The
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported pre-election
violations, including beatings of and threats against opposition candidates
and campaign workers, and pressure on state employees and students to vote
for the Party of Regions. The OSCE, EU, and US criticized the elections, citing
irregularities, delays in vote-counting, and lack of transparency in electoral commissions.
Election results were annulled in five districts because of irregularities.
The November 2011 parliamentary elections law failed to reflect recommendations
of the Council of Europe’s (CoE) Venice Commission and the OSCE; the law
introduced a mixed majoritarian-parliamentary system, increased the threshold
to enter parliament, and banned electoral blocks.
Rule of Law
In April, former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko alleged that prison authorities
in Kharkiv beat and denied her adequate medical care for chronic back problems.
In May, Tymoshenko was transferred to a civilian hospital for treatment.
Tymoshenko was sentenced to seven years in prison in 2011 on abuse of office
charges related to a natural gas contract with Russia. In August, Ukraine’s
Specialized High Court rejected her appeal.
At least 20 former officials from Tymoshenko’s government are under investigation
or have been charged with alleged crimes. In February, a Kiev court sentenced
Yuri Lutsenko, minister of interior under Tymoshenko, to four years in
prison on charges of embezzlement and abuse of office. In August, Lutsenko
was convicted on additional charges. In July, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) found that Ukraine violated Lutsenko’s right to liberty and security
of person, with respect to both his arrest and ongoing detention. In April, a
Kiev court sentenced former acting Defense Minister Valerii Ivashenko to five
years in prison for abuse of office. Ivashenko was released on appeal.
Migration and Asylum
Amendments to the criminal procedure code brought it into line with international
standards by specifying protection from refoulement for asylum seekers
and prohibiting extradition of recognized refugees. However, Ukraine extradited
two men recognized as refugees by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) who faced a clear risk of torture. One was extradited to
Russia in August and the other to Uzbekistan in September.
In January 2012, 58 Somali asylum seekers detained in Zhuravychi, northwestern
Ukraine, went on hunger strike over severe delays in, and lack of access to,
asylum claim application procedures. Local police suppressed the protest using
tear gas and by beating detainees with batons. Some protesters received asylum
following the incident.
In a report on Ukraine’s implementation of benchmarks under visa liberalization
negotiations, the EU found that despite 2011 reforms, some asylum law provisions
still contradict international standards, including the short appeals period and the potential for agencies other than the state migration service to revoke
refugee status.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
On May 19, unidentified assailants defaced photographs at a Kiev exhibition
depicting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) families in Ukraine.
At a May 20 press conference, LGBT Pride organizers cancelled the march scheduled
for that day in Kiev because police claimed they could not protect participants
from potential violence from neo-Nazi and nationalist groups planning a
protest at the same time and location.
After the press conference, five men beat Kiev Pride organizers Svyatoslav
Sheremet and Maksim Kasyanchuk. The authorities opened a criminal investigation
but failed to identify the suspects despite video recordings of the attack,
and failed to consider the activists’ sexual orientation or activism in the investigation.
In June, an unidentified man approached Kiev Pride head Taras Karasiichuk near
his home, asked his sexual orientation, and beat him, breaking his jaw and giving
him concussion. Investigators were unable to identify the attacker.
On July 2 and 9, neo-Nazis and nationalists verbally attacked and tore posters
belonging to LGBT activists who were protesting in Kiev against two draft laws
regarding “promotion of homosexuality” in the public domain and media. The
first law, which imposes up to five years’ imprisonment, was passed by parliament
on October 2 in a first reading. The second law, claiming to “protect children,”
envisions administrative fines of up to US$1,500. On July 2, police intervened
and detained one individual. On July 9, police who were present at the
rally did not intervene.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination
Roma, Crimean Tatars, and other ethnic minorities faced violence from neo-Nazi
groups. In September, for example, a group of unidentified people threw a Molotov cocktail into a Roma settlement in Uzhgorod, southwestern Ukraine.
Police subsequently provided the settlement with 24-hour protection.
In October, the ECtHR ruled that Ukraine failed to effectively investigate a similar
attack in 2001 that killed five members of a Romani family.
In September 2012, parliament passed an anti-discrimination law, which prohibits
discrimination in public services, courts, employment, healthcare, education,
housing, and other areas. The law does not include sexual orientation, citizenship,
occupation, political affiliation, or labor union membership as protected
categories. President Viktor Yanukovych signed the bill despite calls from a
coalition of 34 nongovernmental organizations to veto the legislation due to
insufficient parliamentary review.
In July 2012, parliament passed a controversial state language law allowing the
use of 18 minority languages in regions with at least 10 percent minority language
speakers. Russian became a regional language in 13 out of 27 regions.
The OSCE high commissioner for national minorities called the law “deeply divisive”
for disproportionately favoring Russian while “removing most incentives
for learning or using Ukrainian,” and criticized the law’s hasty adoption.
Civil Society
On August 1, two unidentified assailants attacked and beat environmental
activist Volodymyr Honcharenko from Dnipropetrivsk. Honcharenko died from
his injuries three days later. A few days before the attack, Honcharenko publicized
allegations about radioactive scrap metal dumped in the city of Kryviy Rig,
in southeastern Ukraine. The authorities have not identified a suspect in
Honcharenko’s death or investigated the environmental concerns.
The OSCE’s September interim election report noted the lack of political pluralism
on television. In 2011, TVi television station, the only remaining national
broadcaster openly criticizing the ruling party, was denied a license under the
transfer to digital broadcasting, forcing it to rely on cable networks. Several
cable providers excluded TVi in the 2012 pre-election campaign, apparently
under pressure. In September, a Kiev court ordered TVi to pay four million hryvnas
($485,000) in back taxes, nearly forcing the station’s closure.
In August, investigators identified a former Kharkiv police officer as the main
suspect in the murder of Novy Styl newspaper editor Vasyl Klymentyev, who disappeared
in August 2010 after reporting on official corruption in Kharkiv.The
suspect remained at large.
The ongoing trial of Oleksy Pukach, a senior ministry of interior official charged
with murdering journalist Grihory Gongadze in 2000, remained closed. Human
rights groups criticized the authorities’ failure to investigate alleged pressure on
investigators by other suspects.
In March 2012, parliament passed a new law on public associations simplifying
registration procedures and expanding the scope of approved activities for
NGOs, in response to CoE recommendations from 2007.
Health
Tens of thousands of patients with advanced cancer suffer from severe pain and
other symptoms every year. In order to improve access to quality palliative care
services, the government took several preliminary steps to make oral morphine
available. At this writing, the government was also considering adopting new
drug regulations that remove many barriers to accessing strong pain medications.
Ukraine continued to slowly expand the number of people with opioid drug
dependence receiving opiate substitution treatment—a key HIV prevention intervention—
but remained far from meeting medical need. In prisons, which hold
many injecting drug users, opiate substitution treatment remained unavailable.
Key International Actors
Ukraine’s international partners repeatedly criticized Ukraine’s deteriorating
human rights record.
A May 2012 report by the European Commission and a September statement by
Stefan Füle, the commissioner for enlargement and neighborhood policy,
stressed that a proposed association agreement between the EU and Ukraine
hinges upon concrete actions on human rights concerns, including politically motivated prosecutions, fair and transparent elections, judiciary reform, freedom
of media and association, and ill-treatment in detention.
The UN’s Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the EU,
US, and others condemned the draft laws on propaganda of homosexuality.
Leaders from the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, and France boycotted the
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) European Football
Championship in Ukraine in July to protest Tymoshenko’s imprisonment and
alleged ill-treatment.
The US repeatedly criticized the cases against Tymoshenko and Lutsenko as
politically motivated and called for their release. The US Embassy in Kiev criticized
amendments to the Law on Procuracy for failing to balance law enforcement
and the judiciary and protect the presumption of innocence.
The UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in
October called on Ukraine to combat racism and xenophobia, enact legislation
that protects LGBT people from discrimination, and ensure fair trial rights and
freedom of expression.