Ukraine
Political deadlock, continuing for much of 2007, again hindered Ukraine’s implementation
of necessary reforms. New laws limiting presidential powers sparked a
conflict between parliament and President Victor Yushchenko over cabinet
appointments. On April 2 Yushchenko dissolved parliament and called for new
elections after dozens of politicians from pro-presidential parties defected to a
coalition headed by Yushchenko’s political rival, Viktor Yanukovich. The political
crisis abated when Yushchenko and Yanukovich agreed to parliamentary elections
on September 30. Yanukovich’s Party of Regions won the elections, with the Yulia
Timoshenko Bloc coming second and Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine—People’s Self
Defense party third.
Torture and ill-treatment remain serious problems. Media generally operate without
government interference, but harassment of media outlets and journalists
persists. Concerns remain about inadequate protection of the rights of migrants
and asylum seekers. The government is not taking adequate steps to address
human rights abuses fueling the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Elections
An observer mission led by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) determined that the parliamentary elections mostly met standards
for democratic elections and that freedoms of expression and assembly were
respected. However, observers noted shortcomings including incomplete voter
lists, the elimination of absentee voting for snap elections, the Central Election
Commission’s lack of independence, and the failure of the Constitutional Court to
rule on election-related complaints in a timely manner. In the months prior to the
elections there were credible reports of misconduct, including the distribution of
unsigned brochures containing false information about political parties.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Ukrainian and international organizations reported incidents of torture and illtreatment
in 2007. Ukraine appeared before the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) in May, and in its concluding observations the CAT expressed concern about
torture and ill-treatment in detention, as well as other violations of detainees’
rights, and noted the government’s failure to effectively investigate torture complaints.
The CAT also noted that Ukraine had returned persons to countries where
there are substantial grounds for believing that they would be subjected to torture.
At the request of the Ukrainian authorities, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture (CPT) in June published the report on its visit to Ukraine in
2005. The report concluded that persons detained by the police face a risk of illtreatment,
in particular during initial questioning. The CPT deplored the continuing
practice of holding people for weeks or months in police station lockups,
which often are overcrowded and may lack basic material conditions such as
drinking water, natural light, mattresses, heat, and toilets. The CPT cited significant
improvements in conditions in some temporary holding facilities and prisons,
but found that work requirements in the women’s prison amounted to inhuman
treatment.
Media Freedom
Journalists and media outlets continue to work free of direct government interference,
but threats and physical attacks against journalists critical of government
officials or other prominent figures remain a problem.
For example, on August 14 two unidentified assailants attacked Artem
Skoropadsky, a journalist for the Kommersant-Ukraina newspaper, who linked the
attack to a story he had written citing controversial remarks by Kyiv Mayor Leonid
Chernovetsky. Skoropadsky said the mayor’s press department had threatened a
libel suit over the story. On February 18 two men beat Anatoly Shinkarenko, news
director at the local 9 Kanal television station in Dnipropetrovsk. The attackers
threatened the journalist, promising to destroy him if he continued to report on
an internal conflict at 51 Kanal, a rival television station.
The trial of three former police officers suspected of kidnapping and murdering
investigative journalist Georgy Gongadze in 2000 continues, after being opened
in January 2006 and repeatedly delayed. Media freedom activists lament that still no charges have been brought against former senior government officials implicated
in organizing Gongadze’s killing.
Migrants
Multiple reforms in recent years still have not led to a clear migration policy or a
unified, efficient migration service. Detention conditions for migrants remain poor
in most facilities, and fundamental rights to a lawyer, to inform a third party of
detention, and to be informed of one’s rights are routinely denied. Many asylum
seekers in need of protection are denied refugee status on procedural grounds or
because migration officials fail to evaluate country-of-origin situations. Many
migrants, especially Chechens, remain at risk of being returned to countries
where they may face torture or ill-treatment.
On June 18, 2007, the European Union and Ukraine finalized agreements on visa
facilitation for Ukrainian nationals and on readmission of irregular migrants who
transit Ukraine and are apprehended in the EU. The readmission provisions will
become applicable after a transitional period of two years, and a special accelerated
procedure will apply to persons apprehended in common border regions.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) believe that the readmission agreement
fails to provide sufficient human rights safeguards.
Human Rights Abuses Fueling the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
The government is not addressing the human rights problems fueling the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. The Ukrainian National AIDS Center reported over 6,000
newly registered cases of HIV infection in the first three months of 2007, primarily
among injection drug users. NGOs report that police interference with the delivery
of HIV prevention information and services continues. Those at highest risk of
HIV/AIDS, including drug users and sex workers, are particularly vulnerable to
police harassment and are frequently driven away from lifesaving services.
Despite its promises to increase access for drug users to medication-assisted
treatment (MAT) with methadone or buprenorphine, which is widely recognized as 
among the most effective means to treat opiate dependence, the government has failed to expand successful MAT pilot programs to more regions. The Ministry of
Interior has publicly opposed medication-assisted treatment.
The Ministry of Health has taken measures to expand provision of antiretroviral
therapy for people living with HIV, although not on a scale sufficient to address
the need for it. When selecting candidates for antiretroviral therapy, medical institutions
frequently discriminate against drug users on the unfounded assumption
that they will not adhere to a rigorous course of treatment.
Key International Actors
The EU continues to deepen its engagement with Ukraine, seeking to bolster the
country’s democratic reforms and secure its own economic and energy policies.
In the December 2006 progress report on European Neighborhood Policy implementation
in Ukraine, the EU noted that political dialogue had intensified, and
that Ukraine had made progress toward consolidating respect for human rights
and the rule of law, including by removing pressure on the media and civil society.
The report also stated that reforms are hindered by endemic corruption, lack of
an independent judiciary, and long periods of political instability. During a
September 2007 summit in Kyiv, the EU and Ukraine “reaffirmed strong and sustained
ties,” stressing that Ukraine’s strengthening of the rule of law and respect
for human rights will lead to closer relations with the EU.
In November Giovanni Fava, an Italian member of the European Parliament,
claimed to have information suggesting that in 2005 a Ukrainian airstrip was
used by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)-operated planes involved in the United
States government’s extraordinary rendition program. Ukrainian authorities deny
the allegations.
At its spring session, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe held an
urgent debate on the functioning of democratic institutions in Ukraine and issued
a resolution noting that the April political crisis was a result of “systematic failure
by the successive Ukrainian governments to establish coherent policies backed
by substantial legal, administrative and economic reforms.”
In October 2007 the Council of Europe’s human rights commissioner presented
the report on his December 2006 visit to Ukraine. The report noted the problem of torture and ill-treatment, the lack of access to a lawyer for detainees, and overcrowding
and poor health conditions in pretrial detention facilities. The commissioner
called on the Ukrainian authorities to improve access to treatment and
social reintegration for people living with HIV. The report also noted as problems
violence against women, human trafficking, and abuse of children’s rights.
The European Court of Human Rights found Ukraine responsible for subjecting
Vladimir Kucheruk to inhuman treatment in a pretrial detention facility in 2002.
Officials used rubber truncheons allegedly to subdue Kucheruk, kept him handcuffed
for seven days in a disciplinary cell, and denied him proper medical care.
Authorities also illegally detained Kucheruk for nearly two weeks in violation of a
court order committing him to compulsory psychiatric treatment.
In its June 2007 concluding observations on Ukraine’s initial report on the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of
Children, Child Prostitution, and Child Pornography, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child encouraged Ukraine to adopt an action plan to prevent crimes
against children and to establish a juvenile justice system in conformity with
international standards.