 UKRAINE
 Ukraine is governed by a directiy-electd president and a unicameral parliament,
 the Verkhovna Rada (Supreme Council), which is elected partially according to pro-
 portional representation and partially by direct constituency mandate. According to
 international observers, the parliamentary elections held in March were an improve-
 
 
 1576
 
 ment over those held in 1994. Despite numerous flaws and irregularities, the elec-
 tions generally reflected the will of the electorate. The President appoints the Cabi-
 net and controls government operations. Although the Constitution mandates an
 independent judiciary, the courts are funded through the Ministry of Justice and are
 subject to political interference and corruption, and are inefficient.
 The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs (which
 controls the various police forces), and the Ministry of Defense all have equal re-
 sponsibility for internal security and report to the President through the Cabinet.
 The National Bureau of Investigation, established by presidential decree in 1997,
 was still not funded or fully organized by year's end. The armed forces largely have
 remained outside politics. While civilian authorities generally maintain effective
 control of the security forces, institutional government corruption sometimes can
 lead to their improper use. The SBU and other government agencies have interfered
 indirectly in the political process through criminal investigations of politicians, jour-
 nalists, and influential businessmen. The SBU, police, and Prosecutor's Office have
 drawn domestic and international criticism for their failure to take adequate action
 to curb institutional corruption and abuse in the Government. Members of the secu-
 rity forces committed human rights abuses.
 Ukraine is making a difficult transition from a centrally planned to a market-
 based economy. The private sector has continued to grow and now represents a sub-
 stantial portion of the economy Nevertheless, the country remains in a serious eco-
 nomic crisis. Industrial output has suffered years of sharp decline. Reform, particu-
 larly in the agricultural sector, has stagnated. According to official statistics, about
 half the workforce is employed formally in manufacturing, with the balance divided
 between services and agriculture; however, in reality many industrial enterprises
 have reduced or stopped production. Exports are diversified and include metals,
 chemicals, sugar, and semi-finished goods.- Annual per capita gross domestic product
 for 1998 was approximately $1,000. However, millions of employees go months with-
 out being paid, and most people derive a significant proportion of their income from
 the shadow economy. The Russian financial crisis adversely affected Ukraine's cur-
 rency market, leading to a 70 percent devaluation and increased inflation. Invest-
 ment remains at low levels with many potential investors discouraged by rampant
 corruption, onerous taxation, and arbitrary licensing practices. Unemployment has
 affected women disproportionately. Wealth is concentrated among the political elite
 and directors of state-dominated sectors such as metals, oil, and gas.
 Ukraine's human rights record during the year was mixed; there was limited
 progress in some areas, but serious problems persisted. There were more reports of
 human rights violations than in the previous year, primarily due to infringements
 on freedom of the press and reports of government interference in the March par-
 liamentary elections.
 The criminal justice system has been slow to reform. Prison conditions are harsh,
 and police and prison officials regularly beat detainees and prisoners, and there
 were numerous instances of torture sometimes resulting in death; the beating of
 conscripts in the army by fellow soldiers was common and sometimes resulted in
 death. The Government rarely punishes officials who commit such abuses. There
 were instances of arbitrary arrest and detentions. Lengthy pretrial detention: in very
 poor conditions was common, and detainees often spent months in pretrial detention
 for violations that involved little or no prison time if convicted. Long delays in trials
 are a problem. Political interference and corruption continue to affect the judicial
 process. The judiciary is overburdened, inefficient, and lacks sufficient funding and
 staff. These factors undermine citizens' right to a fair trial. The State continued to
 intrude inordinately in citizens' lives. The Government increasingly interfered with
 freedom of the press, most notably in the context of the March parliamentary elec-
 tions. There were significant restrictions on freedom of association and limitations
 placed on normative religious organizations. There also are some limits on freedom
 of movement. Laws governing political party organizations have the potential to
 limit human rights. Violence against women and children; trafficking in women; dis-
 crimination against women; deep-seated societal anti-Semitism; and discrimination
 against religious, racial, and ethnic minorities are problems.
 The 1996 Constitution provides a legal framework for protecting civil and human
 rights; however, many constitutional provisions still await the passage of enabling
 legislation. Consequently, actual human rights practices often do not conform to con-
 stitutional requirements, and many areas of life still are regulated by Soviet law
 and practices. Nonetheless, the country has made progress on a number of basic
 freedoms, including freedom of speech, which is generally respected.. In addition, on
 several occasions, the Government implemented measures to punish officials who
 committed or abetted mistreatment of detainees and to purge local law enforcement
 agencies of corrupt elements. These measures do not appear to have had a signifi-
 
 
 1577
 
 cant effect, but are a first step. In January the President signed into law the cre-
 ation of the constitutionally mandated Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman,
 and the Rada elected the first Ombudsman in April. However, the law does not pro-
 vide any significant enforcement authority or provide for penalties for obstructing
 the Ombudsman's inquiries. In addition the 1998 budget contained no funding for
 the offices and staff of the Human Rights Ombudsman. Despite these hindrances,
 the Ombudsman's office was active in investigating human rights violations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings by government agents; however, the pervasiveness of corruption, connec-
 tions between government officials and organized crime, and the political activities
 of organized crime figures often blurred the distinction between political and crimi-
 nal acts. Politicians, politically connected businessmen, campaign managers, and
 journalists were victims of possibly politically motivated-and sometimes fatal-at-
 tacks.
 According to official statistics, there were 46 contract killings during the year,
 some of which may have been politically motivated. In April Vadym Hetman, former
 Member of Parliament and former director of the National Bank, was murdered out-
 side his home. In February the deputy head of the Crimean government, Aleksandr
 Safontsev, was killed in a bomb explosion in Simferopol. The mayor of Shakhtersk
 was murdered in February. The campaign manager of a prominent Kiev mayoral
 candidate was found strangled in March. At year's end, these cases remained un-
 solved. In addition several politically active individuals were wounded in violent at-
 tacks.
 Abuse of prisoners and detainees, and harsh prison conditions, sometimes led to
 death (see Section 1.c.). For example, a police officer in Kryuyrh beat a person to
 death; however, he was arrested and prosecuted. One of his colleagues also was ar-
 rested for condoning the beating (see Section 1.c.). There were 2,300 deaths in pris-
 on and detention facilities during the year.
 Members of the military killed soldiers during violent hazing incidents (see Sec-
 tion 1.c.). According to a government official, 10 to 12 military personnel were beat-
 en to death during the year, and a total of 20 to 30 died as an indirect result of
 injuries sustained from hazing. The Procuracy prosecuted approximately 200 mili-
 tary personnel for violent hazing during the year.
 The Government made no known progress in resolving a number of the high pro-
 file killings of the past years. There was no progress in resolving the 1997 murders
 of the governor of the Razoolnensky district; the Crimean Deputy Minister for Tour-
 ism and Resorts; and the prominent businessman, Arkadiy Tabachnyk of Odesa; or
 the bombing of the intensive care unit of a hospital in Simferopol. The Government
 announced in the autumn that it had identified the killers of Rada deputy Yevhen
 Scherban in 1996 but did not publicize their names.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were no new developments in the 1996 kidnaping of the former speaker of
 the Crimean legislature or the 1994 disappearance of Myhailo Boichyshyn, a promi-
 nent leader of the Popular Movement of Ukraine party.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture; however, police and prison officials regularly
 beat detainees and prisoners, and there were numerous reports of such abuse. Am-
 nesty International and other human rights groups continued to receive regular re-
 ports that Berkut (special militia units or riot police) troops beat and tortured in-
 mates as part of regular training exercises. The media reports that police subject
 detainees to the "swallow" where the detainee is placed on his stomach and his feet
 are tied to his hands behind him, forcing his back to arch. Another abuse is the
 "baby elephant," where a gas mask is placed on the prisoner's head and the flow
 of oxygen slowly reduced. Other detainees are beaten until they waive their right
 to an attorney. There is no effective mechanism for registering complaints about
 mistreatment or for obtaining redress for such actions. Prisoners may address com-
 plaints to the Human Rights Ombudsman and, in the first 5 months of its oper-
 ation, that office received widespread reports of torture in pretrial detention. How-
 ever, the Ombudsman has no enforcement authority, and the Government made lit-
 tle effort during the year to end such practices or to punish officials who committed
 or abetted such abuses. According to the office of the Human Rights Ombudsman,
 most of the complaints it received centered on human rights violations by law en-
 forcement personnel.
 
 
 1578
 Police also abused Roma, particularly in the Transcarpathian region, and har-
 assed and abused dark-skinned persons (see Section 5).
 In April by presidential edict, the Government created a Penal Department to
 oversee reform of the penal system and to serve as the administrative center of the
 penal system. The new department originally was placed under the supervision of
 the Ministry of Interior. Subsequently, however, it was placed under the Ministry
 of Justice, as requested by international observers. To date there have been no
 known changes in personnel, responsibilities, or practices from those of the Interior
 Ministry's penal system administration. The Government also acted to punish some
 prison and police officials who committed or condoned violence against prisoners. A
 supervising police officer in Kryvy Rih was arrested for condoning the actions of his
 colleague, who in 1997 beat to death an inmate of a "sobering center," to which pub-
 licly drunken persons are taken. In Sevastopol a court convicted a police officer of
 the 1996 beating death of a detainee in police custody. Given the scope of the prob-
 lem, these isolated actions failed to limit abuses. Police corruption also remains a
 serious problem.
 There were continued reports of harsh conditions and violence against conscripts
 in the armed forces. Senior officers reportedly required malnourished recruits to beg
 for food or money. Senior conscripts often beat recruits, sometimes to death. Punish-
 ment administered for committing or condoning such activities did not serve as an
 effective deterrent to the further practice of such abuses. Since 1991 450 soldiers
 have been convicted of violent harassment of their colleagues. Approximately 200
 military personnel were prosecuted during the year for violent hazing (10 to 12
 conscripts were beaten'to death and 20 to 30 died from injuries related to hazing)
 (see Section 1.c.); sentences for beatings without serious injury were 2 to 3 years
 in a military penal unit. In May two soldiers were sentenced to 15 years in prison
 for killing a recruit. In June a court sentenced two soldiers to 15 years in prison
 and sentenced two others to 2 years in a penal unit for beating a young recruit until
 he committed suicide in 1997.
 There were no developments in the 1996 beating of the Member of Parliament
 (M.P.) from Kiev (Myroslav Horbatyuk) or the attack on the former M.P. from
 Zaporizhzhia (Victor Slesarenko) whose car was blown up. They had claimed that
 the violent attacks against them were linked to their investigations into high-level'
 corruption in the Government. The Government still has not announced the results
 of its investigations.
 There was no improvement in prison conditions, which are very harsh and do not
 meet minimum international standards. Prison officials intimidate and mistreat in-
 mates. Due in part to the severe economic crisis, prisons and detention centers are
 severely overcrowded and lack adequate sanitation and medical facilities. Due to
 overcrowding, the Parliament announced in July a mass amnesty that released
 25,000 inmates. Because the country lacks a well-developed system of suspended
 sentences, and the law does not differentiate between misdemeanors and felonies,
 at least one-third of inmates were convicted of only minor violations.
 According to the law, information on prison and pretrial detention conditions is
 considered to be a state secret, and no official statistics are available. However, in-
 formation from diplomatic sources indicated that at the beginning of the year there
 were 218,085 prisoners in the penal system, 44,300 of whom were in pretrial deten-
 tion. There were 2,300 deaths during the year, which is more than 3 times the
 death rate of the general population. Poor sanitary conditions result in deaths from
 diseases such as tuberculosis and dysentery, and there are frequent incidents of
 murder by fellow inmates and suicide. According to media reports, in 1997 there
 were 107 suicides in jails.
 The Government continued to allow prison visits by diplomatic representatives
 and human rights monitors; however, these groups- reported that during the year
 it became more difficult to obtain access to prisons. Cases were reported in which
 prisoners were not permitted correspondence and family visits were allowed only
 once per year. Prisoners may complain to the Ombudsman about the conditions of
 detention, but human rights groups reported that inmates were punished for initiat-
 ing complaints.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. The law provides that authorities may detain a suspect for 3 days without
 a warrant, after which an arrest order must be issued. The Constitution stipulates
 that only courts may issue arrest warrants, but under its transitional provisions,
 the Prosecutor's Office retains the right to issue search and arrest warrants until
 2001. The maximum period of detention after charges have been filed is 18 months,
 but the law does not limit the aggregate time of detention before and during a trial.
 The law permits citizens to contest an arrest in court or appeal to the prosecutor.
 
 
 1579
 
 The Constitution requires immediate notification of family members about an ar-
 rest, but this action often is not taken in practice.
 By law a trial must begin no later than 3 weeks after indictment, but this require-
 ment rarely is met by the overburdened court system. Months may pass before a
 defendant finally is brought to trial, and the situation did not improve during the
 year. Complicated cases can take years to go to trial. Although the 1996 amendment
 to the Criminal Procedures Code provides for bail, it is used rarely. Restrictions on
 travel outside of a given area sometimes are employed. Accused persons usually are
 held without bail in pretrial detention for several months. The latest available offi-
 cial statistics (from 1996) indicated that there were 233,000 prisoners, 45,000 of
 whom were persons held without bail in pretrial detention. The Constitution pro-
 vides compensation for unlawful or arbitrary arrest, detention, or conviction, but
 there are no known cases in which this provision was invoked. Reports indicate that
 this inaction is a result of lack of faith in the judiciary, rather than the absence
 of unlawful or arbitrary detentions.
 The law stipulates that a defense attorney be provided without charge to the indi-
 gent from the moment of detention or the filing of charges, whichever comes first.
 There are insufficient numbers of defense attorneys to protect suspects from unlaw-
 ful, lengthy imprisonment under extremely poor conditions. Although the concept of
 providing attorneys from the state system remains in principle, public attorneys
 often refuse to defend indigents for the low government fee. While in custody, a sus-
 pect or a prisoner is allowed by law to talk with a lawyer in private; however,
 human rights groups report that the client-attorney privilege occasionally is denied
 by prison or investigative officials. To protect the defendant, each investigative file
 must contain a document signed by the defendant attesting that the charges against
 him, his right to an attorney, and his right not to give evidence against himself or
 his relatives have been explained to him. An appeals court may dismiss a conviction
 or order a new trial if this document is missing. As defendants increasingly became
 aware of their rights, they insisted on observance of these procedures. However,
 many persons still were unaware of these safeguards.
 The Government occasionally arrests persons who are openly critical of the Gov-
 ernment (usually opposition politicians or editors/journalists from the opposition
 press) on criminal libel or tax evasion charges (see Section 2.a.). Mykhaylo Brodsky,
 part owner of the opposition paper Kievskiye Viedomosti, was arrested on tax eva-
 sion charges relatedto his "Dendi" financial companies in March. He was released
 in April following his election to Parliament. However, a fellow Dendi employee is
 still in pretrial custody. Mykola Syvulskiy, a leading activist of the opposition
 Hromada party, was arrested in September for illegal financial transactions. Since
 Syvulskiy was a member of the opposition shadow cabinet and the chief organizer
 of a referendum drive to unseat President Kuchma, many observers concluded that
 this arrest was politically motivated. In December an arrest warrant was issued for
 Oleh Lyashko, editor in chief of the opposition newspaper Polityka, for allegedly fail-
 ing to appear at the criminal libel trial against him (see Section 2.a.).
 Official corruption  is widespread. The   Government apparently    enforced
 anticorruption statutes selectively for political ends. Victor Palyvoda, an aide to the
 former president, was acquitted of corruption charges after 3 years in pretrial cus-
 tody. Former cabinet official Petro Shkudun was held in pretrial detention on cor-
 ruption charges since February. All defendants and their attorneys maintained that
 they were singled out for their opposition to the current presidential administration.
 In August the Government arbitrarily detained several hundred directors of most-
 ly state-owned enterprises in the Kiev convention center where they were meeting.
 They were allowed to leave only after signing an agreement to repay contributions
 to the state pension fund (although in many instances the State owed more to the
 enterprises in terms of back wages and debts on purchases than the enterprises
 owed the State). Other debtor enterprise directors were sent to compulsory civil de-
 fense training at a camp outside of Kiev until they signed the agreement.
 Exile as a punishment does not exist in the law, and the Government does not
 use it.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, in practice, the judiciary is subject to considerable political inter-
 ference from the executive branch and also suffers from corruption and inefficiency.
 The courts are funded through the Ministry of Justice, which allows the Govern-
 ment to influence the judicial process. The presidential administration also report-
 edly continues the old Soviet tradition of weighing in by telephone directly with jus-
 tices.
 The establishment of an independent judicial system provided for in the Constitu-
 tion awaits the passage of implementing legislation. As a result, the judiciary con-
 tinues to operate according to Soviet principles. Most judges and prosecutors were
 
 
 1580
 appointed during the Soviet era, and court officials are attuned closely to the Gov-
 ernment's interests. Human rights lawyers claim that the judiciary is not free from
 government influence, particularly at the regional and local levels. Court chairmen
 are, for instance, appointed directly by the executive and wield considerable influ-
 ence over the outcome of a case through case assignments, control of staff and pro-
 motions, and control of social benefits available to judges. Court chairmen report-
 edly deliberately overburden independent-minded judges with too many cases and
 then instigate disciplinary actions against them for not completing their casework.
 There are credible reports that court chairmen regularly followed executive instruc-
 tions.
 The judiciary lacks sufficient staff and funds, which engenders inefficiency and
 corruption. The court system receives all its funding from the Ministry of Justice.
 Early in the year, the Prime Minister announced his intention to cut the budget of
 the arbitration courts drastically' because they allegedly too often decided against
 state interests. Although this cut was not carried out due to the controversy it cre-
 ated, the action demonstrated clearly the dependence of the court system on the ex-
 ecutive, and the Government's willingness to make use of that dependence.
 The authority and independence of the judicial system also. are undermined by the
 poor record of compliance with court decisions in civil cases. Provisions calling for
 criminal punishment for noncompliance with court decisions rarely are used. Com-
 pliance-is particularly poor if the decision clashes with government interests. The
 Prosecutor General, Head of the Supreme Court, chairmen of regional courts, and
 the chairman of the Kiev municipal court (or the deputies of these officials) can sus-
 pend court decisions, which leads to interference, manipulation, and corruption.
 Although many local and international observers regard the Constitutional Court
 as the most independent judicial body, the extent to which it is independent in prac-
 tice from the Government is not yet clear. Some observers construed the July ruling
 that subordinated the State Property Fund (the body responsible for privatization
 of state-owned property) to the Government as indicating a propresidential bias.
 The 1996 Constitution provides for a thorough restructuring of the court system,
 including the introduction of appellate courts; however, pending the passage of the
 required enabling legislation, the court system still is organized along Soviet lines,
 with the exception of the Constitutional Court. The 1996 Constitution provides that
 the old court system may remain- in place for a maximum period of 5 years, until
 2001.
 The court system consists of the Constitutional Court, general jurisdiction courts,
 and arbitration/commercial courts- General jurisdiction courts and arbitration courts
 are organized according to three levels: District courts; regional courts; and the Su-
 preme Court and Supreme Arbitration Court. General jurisdiction courts are divided
 into criminal and civil sections. Military courts only hear cases involving military
 personnel.
 The Constitutional Court consists of 18 members, appointed for 9-year terms in
 equal numbers by the President, the Parliament, and the Congress of Judges. It is
 the ultimate interpreter of legislation and the Constitution and determines the con-
 stitutionality of legislation, presidential edicts, cabinet acts, and acts of the Crimean
 Autonomous Republic. The President, at least 45 Members of Parliament, the Su-
 preme Court, the Human Rights Ombudsman, and the Crimean legislature can re-
 quest the Constitutional Court to hear a: case. Citizens may only apply to the Con-
 stitutional Court through the Human Rights Ombudsman.
 Under the current court system, cases are decided by judges who sit singly, occa-
 sionally with two public assessors ("lay judges" or professional jurors with some
 legal training), or in groups of three for more serious cases. The Constitution pro-
 vides for public, adversarial trials, including a judge, public assessors, state prosecu-
 tor, defense, and jury (when required by law). With some qualifications, these re-
 quirements are upheld in practice. However, implementing legislation establishing
 juries has not been adopted. Complicated cases can take years to go to trial. In the
 interim, defendants usually wait in pretrial detention. The 1996 amendment to the
 Criminal Procedures Code provides for bail, but to date it has been used rarely.
 Organized crime elements also are widely alleged to influence court decisions. The
 Justice Ministry reported that in 1997 135 judges were disciplined, 22 dismissed,
 -and 5 prosecuted for bribery. No higher court judge has been disciplined to date.
 Criminal elements routinely use intimidation to induce victims and witnesses to
 withdraw or change their testimony. The law requires that a special police unit pro-
 tect judges, witnesses, defendants, and their relatives. However, it has not yet been
 formed, and trial participants are vulnerable to pressure.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are also organized-into offices at the rayon, oblast,
 and republic levels. They are responsible ultimately to the Prosecutor General, who
 
 
 1581
 is appointed by the President and confirmed by the Parliament for a 5-year term.
 Reioal and district prosecutors are a ppointed by the Prosecutor General.
 Although by law prosecutors and defense attorneys have equal status, in practice
 prosecutors are much more influential. The procuracy, in its pretrial investigative
 function, acts in effect as a grand jury. A prosecutor may initiate investigation
 through his own office or conduct investigations initiated by the Ministry of Internal
 Affairs or the SBU.
 The Constitution considerably curtails the prosecutor's authority, limiting it to
 prosecution, representing the public interest in court, oversight of investigations,
 and implementation of court decisions. However, in the absence of new criminal and
 criminal procedure codes to implement constitutional restrictions, the Prosecutor's
 Office continues to conduct investigations and oversee general observance of the law.
 In November 1997, the Constitutional Court interpreted the Procuracy Law, ruling
 that citizens can dispute prosecutors' decisions in court.
 The Constitution includes procedural provisions to ensure a fair trial, including
 the right of a suspect or witness to refuse to testify against himself or his relatives.
 However, pending passage of legislation to implement these constitutional provi-
 sions, a largely Soviet-era criminal justice system remains in place. While the de-
 fendant is presumed innocent, conviction rates have changed little since the Soviet
 era. Nearly all completed cases result in convictions.
 According to official statistics, in 1997 there were.237,000 convictions and oniy
 1,102 acquittals (83,500 convictions led to jail sentences). In the first half of 1998,
 there were 125,429 convictions of which 46,144 resulted in prison sentences; 444 de-
 fendants were acquitted. However, as judges frequently send cases unlikely to end
 in conviction back to the prosecutor for "additional investigation" (which usually
 leads to the dropping of the case), these statistics are somewhat misleading. Addi-
 tionally, evidence indicates that suspects often bribe court officials to drop charges
 before cases go to trial, to lessen sentences, or to commute them. However, as courts
 have become more independent, the number of acquittals has increased each year.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-A-
 though the Constitution requires that courts issue search warrants, this provision
 has not yet been implemented, and prosecutors continue to issue search warrants.
 The SBU may conduct intrusive surveillance and searches without a warrant, with
 the consent of the Prosecutor General, who nominally oversees this function of the
 SBU. However, the extent to which the Prosecutor General utilizes his authority to
 monitor SBU activities and to curb excesses by security officials is unknown. The
 Constitution provides citizens with the right to examine any dossier on them in pos-
 session of the SBU and to sue for physical and emotional damages incurred by an
 investigation. However, this right does not exist in practice, because the necessary
 implementing legislation has not been passed.
 Some remnants of Soviet control mechanisms persist. There are no probable cause
 statutes, and police officials and militia personnel have the right to stop persons and
 vehicles arbitrarily to initiate extensive document checks and vehicle inspections.
 Police may detain a person arbitrarily for up to 3 hours to verify identity.
 All internal passports contain a stamp indicating residence and matrimonial sta-
 tus. Groups must be registered with the government to engage in almost any activ-
 ity, whether commercial, political, religious, or philanthropic. Unregistered groups
 are prohibited from opening bank accounts, acquiring property, or entering into con-
 tracts.
 The Law on Public Organizations prohibits members of the police, SBU, and
 armed forces from joining political parties. Prior to the March parliamentary elec-
 tions, mass-perhaps coerd-rolent of public sector and government employ-
 ees augmented the ranks of progovernment parties, particularly the People's Demo-
 cratic Party (see Section 2.b.).
 The press and human rights groups reported several cases of abuse of psychiatry
 for economic reasons, where persons involved inin  ey    inheritance, or divorce
 disputes were diagnosed wrongfully with schizophrenia and confined to psychiatric
 institutions. The country still uses Soviet classifcations of mental illness and has
 no law on psychiatric practice. Persons diagnosed with mental illness may be con-
 fined and treated forcibly, declared not responsible for their actions, and stripped
 of their civil rights without being present at the hearings or notified of the ruling.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution   h  a 1991 law provide for
 freedom of speech and of the press; however, in practice the Government partially
 limits freedom of the press through tax inspections, libel cases, subsidization, and
 intimidation of journalists that leads many to practice self-censorship. The Govern-
 
 
 1582
 ment has a virtual monopoly on broadcast media; however, there is a wide variety
 of newspapers and periodicals available, espousing different political points of view,
 and individuals can and frequently do criticize the Government without reprisal.,
 The print media, both independent and government-owned, demonstrate a tend-
 ency toward self-censorship on matters sensitive to the Government. Private news-
 p apers have been established and are free to function on a purely commercial basis.
 owever, they are subject to various pressures such as control of access to afford-
 able state-subsidized newsprint; dependence on political patrons who may facilitate
 financial support from the State Press Support Fund; close scrutiny from govern-
 ment officials, especially at the local level; and politically motivated visits by tax in-
 spectors. In 1997 the President issued a decree on support of the press that requires
 te Cabinet to draw up a list of publications needing government support, including
 those whose founders include central and local governments, public organizations,
 associations, unions, educational institutions, and newspaper employees. The jour-
 nalistic community believed that this decree was intended to control the press by
 supporting loyal members. The dependence of the subsidized press and much of the
 private press on government patronage has particularly inhibited criticism at the
 local level. The Ministry has warned some periodicals against fomenting ethnic ten-
 sions and conducting antistate propaganda and has applied to the Prosecutor's Of-
 fice to open investigations into those newspapers. However, no newspapers are
 known to have been prosecuted as a result.
 The Committee on Protection of State Secrets enjoys broadly defined powers over
 all media. According to current law, information on executions, prison and pretrial
 detention conditions, and centers for the forcible treatment of alcoholics, are consid-
 ered state secrets (see Sections l.a. and 1.c.). Journalists report thati in general, the
 Committee has not interfered with their activities. One journalist, Oleg Lyashko,
 editor of the opposition newspaper Polityka, was charged in June with violating se-
 crecy statutes or a series of- articles describing covert SBU activities against the
 West. His case was dropped shortly afterwards; however, in December Polityka was
 forced to cease publication following an October 6 district court ruling that banned
 the newspaper for having published these articles that allegedly contained state se-
 crets-the same state secrets from the previously dismissed charge. The newspaper
 had never been informed that a court case was pending against it and was not given
 an opportunity to present a defense.
 An arrest warrant for Lyashko also was issued by the Kiev Pechersk District
 Court for allegedly not appearing in court in connection with a summons for a sepa-
 rate libel case, although Lyashko claimed that he never received a court summons.
 Also in December, the local state printing company in Dnipropetrovsk refused to
 print the local opposition newspaper Dnepropetrovskaya Pravda, citing technical up-
 grades. Several observers argued that this action was a political decision, because
 these technical upgrades did not affect printing of the other newspapers that the
 company prints, and because Dnepropetrovskaya Pravda is currently the subject of
 a criminal libel suit.
 The Government, both central and local, regularly targeted opposition newspapers
 with unannounced tax inspections or fire and building code inspections. Three oppo-
 sition newspapers were forced to cease operations because their accounts were fro-
 zen at various points during the year by the Tax Inspectorate: Pravda Ukrayiny;
 Polityka; and Vseukrayinskye Viedomosti. These newspapers appealed the deci-
 sions of the Tax.Inspectorate. Pravda Ukrayiny won its appeal in June, but at year's
 end the decision was in abeyance pending a decision on the Tax Inspectorate's
 counterappeal. Although its accounts were frozen in June, Polityka still is being
 published, having reopened following a court appeal. Vseukrayinskiye Viedomosti
 went out of business in March due to a court decision that continued the freeze on
 its accounts and allowed confiscation of income, even while its appeal of the libel
 suit that had prompted the Tax Inspectorate's actions still was pending. A fourth
 opposition paper, Kievskie Viedomosti, had its accounts frozen in October but con-
 tinued operation through the support of financial backers. In April the radio news
 station Kievskiye Viedomosti (the carrier of Voice of America andBritish Broadcast-
 ing Corporation programming) was closed temporarily for alleged fire code restric-
 tions but resumed operations shortly thereafter. In March Mykhaylo Brodsky, part
 owner of the popular opposition newspaper Kievskiye Viedomosti, was arrested on
 tax evasion charges. He was released in April following his election to Parliament.
 In October an arbitration court evicted the editorial staff of Kievskiye Viedomosti
 from its offices due to alleged lease contract violations, and its accounts were frozen.
 The paper appealed the decision to a higher court, but was forced to reduce publica-
 tion as a result of the eviction. At year's end, Kievskiye Viedomosti still had no per-
 manent offices, its accounts remained frozen, and it was unable to pay its staff or
 distributors.
 
 
 1583
 Central and local governments also frequently use criminal libel cases or civil
 suits based on alleged damage to a "person's honor and integrity" to punish critics.
 Article 7 of the Civil Code allows anyone, including public officials, to sue for dam-
 ages if circulated information, including a publication, is untrue or if it insults a
 person's honor or dignity. Article 125 of the Criminal Code prescribes imprisonment
 of up to 5 years for libel. There is no distinction between private individuals and
 public officials (except for the President) nor is there a limit to the amount of dam-
 ages that can be awarded to the plaintiff Consequently, any journalist who pub-
 lishes an article critical of a public official risks being sued for damages. Addition-
 ally, the Prosecutor General can fie criminal libel charges. At  11 newspapers,
 2 regional television stations, and numerous individual journalists were fined heav-
 ily during the year for libel or injury to personal honor and dignity. Journalists com-
 plain that because the law does not limit damages, it is biased against them and
 can be used to drive opposition newspapers out of business.
 On occasion fines were so large that accounts were frozen and equipment con-
 fiscatd by the Tax Inspectorate to enforce payment. In July the director of a
 Donetsk television company was barred from any journalistic activity for 5 years for
 alleged libel; however, in August the regional court overturned the local court's deci-
 sion and ordered a new judicial review, but by year's end the results of the review
 were not available. In April the Kherson regional prosecutor specifically warned edi-
 tors of all local newspapers against libeling the President. In May the Prosecutor
 General ordered Kiev district prosecutors to investigate the operations of several op-
 position newspapers. Journalistic professionalism often is lacking; nevertheless, it is
 clear that the majority of libel and personal dignity suits are motivated politically.
 Journalists sometimes were subjected to physical attack related to their profes-
 sional activities, and the journalistic community contended that reporters received
 threats                       were assaulted physically for investigation of crime
 and offial corruption. The intermeshing of organized crime and many public offi-
 cials makes it difficult to assess to what extent these attacks and threats were moti-
 vated politically. In August a Kievskiye Viedomosti reporter was arrested on
 charges of evasion of conscription, which carries a 3-year prison term, following a
 series of articles mildly critical of the Government.
 Despite government pressure and media self-censorship, the variety of news-
 papers and periodicals on the market, each espousing the view of its respective
 sponsor, provides a variety of opinion. Government attempts to control the press are
 reported by the media. Foreig newspapers and periodicals are circulated freely.
 The broadcast media, the primary source of news and information for most
 Ukrainians, are primarily state-owned, and the Government took steps to strength-
 en its control over this sector. In June the Government transferred control of state-
 owned broadcasting and transmission facilities from the State Committee on Tele-
 vision and Radio (the state body responsible for managing the broadcast media) to
 the Ministry of Information. A September presidential edict subordinated the State
 Committee directly to the Cabinet of Ministers, thus eliminating the partial par-
 liamentary control over the institution that previously existed. One private tele-
 vision station complained that it was required to submit its news broadcasts to the
 State Committee for approval, but following public outcry, the requirement ended.
 The President and the Parliament each appoint half of the members of the National
 Council for Television and Radio Broadcasting, which issues licenses and allocates
 broadcasing time. The law entitles private and foreign companies to establish and
 operate their own transmission facilities, provided that they obtain a license from
 the National Council.
 There is no known government censorship of books, film, or theater.
 While major universities ar te sate owned, they operate for the most part under
 full autonomy. However, academic freedom isnen an eeped and poorly under-
 stood concept. Nepotism and bribery are reportedly common during entrance exams
 and also influence the granting of degrees. Administrators of universities and aca-
 demic and research institute directors possess the power to silence colleagues by de-
 nying them the ability to publish, withholding pay and housing benefits, or directly
 terminating them. This atmosphere tends to lim the spirit of free inqiry. Restric-
 tions by the Communications Ministry on the mailing of scientific documents also
 have caused concern.
 The State Secrets Committee maintains censorship offices in state scientific and
 research institutes, including those not conducting any classified research. An April
 presidential edict allows only government-designated contractors to provide Internet
 access at state institutions that have such censorship offices.
 All private and religiously affiliated universities operate without any reported
 state interference or harassment.
 
 
 1584
 
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution and law pro-
 vide for freedom of assembly, and the Government generally respects this right in
 practice. The 1989 Law on Public Assembly circumscribes the freedom of assembly
 by stipulating that organizations must apply for permission to their respective local
 administration at least 10 days before a planned event or demonstration. The Con-
 stitution requires that demonstrators merely inform the authorities of a planned
 demonstration in advance; however, authorities insist that all demonstrations meet
 the restrictive requirements of the 1989 law. Under the 1989 law, participants in
 demonstrations are prohibited from inciting violence or ethnic conflict and from call-
 ing for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. In practice unlicensed dem-
 onstrations are common, and most occur without police interference.
 The Constitution, law, and onerous government regulations restrict freedom of as-
 sociation to varying degrees. The Constitution prohibits the establishment of parties
 and organizations that advocate the elimination of the country's independence or
 the violent overthrow of the Government and of the constitutional order; that jeop-
 ardize Ukraine's sovereignty or territorial integrity; that undermine its security;
 that foment ethnic, racial, or religious hatred; that violate individual rights and lib-
 erties; or that jeopardize public -health. The Constitution also prohibits the estab-
 lishment of political party organizations in the executive and judicial branches, mili-
 tary units, state-owned enterprises, educational, and other public institutions. Many
 members of such bodies nonetheless publicly associate themselves with specific par-
 ties.
 A Government requirement to have representatives in at least half of the regions
 (oblasts) of the country as a prerequisite for registration as a political party pri-
 marily affects Russian and Crimean Tartar organizations in Crimea. The Ministry
 of Justice, with the Prosecutor General's consent, has the authority to warn, fine,
 or suspend operations of political parties for illegal operations. Suspension can be
 for up to 3 months and can be extended for 6 months upon the Ministry's request.
 In March the Constitutional Court invalidated the 1993 Crimean law on citizens'
 associations, thus outlawing regional Crimean parties. The 1992 Law on Public Or-
 ganizations prohibits the State from financing political parties and other public or-
 ganizations. According to the law, political parties may not receive funds from
 abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. It bars political parties from having
 administrative or organizational structures abroad. The law prohibits police authori-
 ties, members of the SBU, and armed forces personnel from joining political parties.
 Prior to the March parliamentary elections, mass-perhaps 'coerced-enrollment
 of public sector and government employees augmented the ranks of progovernment
 parties, particularly the People's Democratic Party (see Section 1.fQ.
 Freedom of association also is' restricted significantly through a strict registration
 requirement that lends itself to political manipulation and corruption. Groups must
 register with the Government to pursue almost any purpose. The Ministries of In-
 ternal Affairs, Justice, Economy, and Foreign Economic Relations, as well as the
 State Committees on Religion and Broadcasting, and other government bodies have
 registration functions and used this power to limit freedom of association (see Sec-
 tions 1.d. and 2.c.).
 The registration law gives the Government'an unlimited right to inspect the ac-
 tivities of all registered groups. According to this law, a registered group must: (1)
 keep the Government apprised of all its activities, including notification of any
 meetings; (2) make its meetings open to all persons at all times, regardless of
 whether they are members; and (3) upon request, present its registration documents
 to any government official, including the Prosecutor's Office, and be ready to prove
 that its activities are in compliance with its charter.'A change in the group's charter
 necessitates reregistration.
 A registered group may not duplicate any function or service that the Government
 is expected to provide. For example, human rights lawyers who wish to represent
 prisoners are prohibited from establishing an association because the Government
 is required by the Constitution to provide lawyers for the accused. Lack of registra-
 tion has several important disadvantages. Unregistered groups are prohibited from
 having bank accounts, acquiring property, or entering into contracts.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution and the 1991 Law on Freedom of Con-
 science and Religion provide for separation of church and state and the right to
 practice the religion of one's choice. With the exception of some-nounative religions,
 the Government generally respects these rights in practice. The Government gen-
 erally permits -religious organizations to establish places of worship and to train
 clergy. The Government has continued to expedite allotment of land plots for con-
 struction of new houses of worship and to return religious buildings and sites to
 their former owners.
 
 
 1585
 However, the Government's protection of religious freedom deteriorated for non-
 native religious organizations (defined as all organizations other than Orthodox,
 Greek Catholic, or Jewish). The Government does not discriminate against individ-
 ual believers of nonnative religions, but their organizations faced greater difficulty
 in carrying out their activities during the year. Through burdensome licensing re-
 quirements and informal means, local governments restricted normative religions as
 well as Christian denomimations other than Greek Catholic and Orthodox.
 A 1993 amendment to the 1991 law restricts the activities of nonnative, foreign-
 based, religious organizations. The amendment narrowly defines the permissible ac-
 tivities of members of the clergy, preachers, teachers, and other foreign citizen re
 resentatives of foreign organizations. They may preach, administer religious or-
 nances, or practice other canonical activities "only in those religious organizations-
 which invited them to Ukraine and with official approval of the governmental body
 that registered the statutes and the articles of the pertinent religious organization."
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints complained that this restriction-
 prevented the transfer of its missionaries between cities. It also claimed that the
 ev municipal committee on religious affairs has not allowed any new missionaries
 to enter Kiev since December 1997.
 All religious organizations are required by the Law on the Freedom of Conscience
 and Religion to register with both the central office of the State Committee on Reli-
 gious Affairs, a process that generally takes about 1 month, and the- Committee's
 local city or regional office. The regional offices also supervise the compliance of reli-
 gious organizations with the provisions of the law. Nonnative religious organizations
 credibly reported that, especially at the local or regional levels, officials of the State
 Committee refused to register their organizations for protracted periods, thus effec-
 tively preventing their activities (see Section 2.b.).
 Native religious organizations, especially the Orthodox Church in central, south-
 ern, and eastern Ukraine and the Greek Catholic Church in western Ukraine, ex-
 erted significant political influence at the local and regional levels and pressured
 local officials not to register normative religious organizations or allow them to rent
 or purchase property. Each of the two dominant denominations, within their respec-
 tive spheres of influence, also pressured local officials to restrict the activities of the
 other.
 The ongoing dispute among competing Orthodox Christian administrative bodies
 claiming to be "the Ukrainian Orthodox Church" remained deadlocked. In 1997
 leaders of major religious denominations and churches signed a government-drafted
 memorandum on the nonviolent resolution of religious disputes. However, the Gov-
 ernment has been unable to stop disagreements between the Orthodox believers and
 Greek Catholics in the western part of the country, where the two communities are
 contentious and often engage in bitter disputes over church buildings and property
 in over 600 localities. The Kiev Patriarchate of the Orthodox Church complains of
 harassment. by local authorities in predominantly Russian-speaking eastern
 Ukraine, while the Moscow Patriarchate of the Orthodox Church complains that
 local governments turn a blind eye to the appropriation of their churches in Ukrain-
 inn-speaking western Ukraine by Ukrainian nationalists.
 Implementation of a 1992 decree on restitution of religious community property
 seized during the Soviet era remains stalled in many p laces. Numerous Jewish con-
 gregations have negotiated successfully with local authorities for worship space. In
 1996 a Kiev arbitration court decided in favor of transferring the title of the former
 Kiev Central Synagogue, which in Soviet times was used as a puppet theater, to
 a Chabad Hasidic congregation. By December 1997, the puppet theater had vacated
 the building, and in the spring the building reopened once again as a synagogue.
 The decision set an important precedent for the judiciary's role in religious property
 restitution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and with some limits, the
 Government respects them in practice. However, the Government has not yet ful-
 filled its pledge to abolish mandatory registration and to replace it with an informa-
 tional residence register. Regulations impose a nationwide requirement to register
 at the workplace and place of residence in order to be eligible for social benefits,
 thereby complicating freedom of movement by limiting access to certain social bene-
 fits to the place where one is registered. Persons who move to other regions for work
 in the private sector, for example, may be denied formal access to free medical care
 and other services provided by the State. Residence without registration carries a
 fine under the administrative code, but this provision rarely is enforced. Human
 rights groups reported an increasing number of cases of persons being stripped of
 their residence registration, evicted from their homes, and made homeless through
 criminal fraud or court error.
 
 
 1586
 A regulation announced in August requires foreigners to obtain special permits
 to visit areas within 30 to 50 kilometers of the border. The regulation is not being
 enforced, pending the adoption of implementing regulations.
 Citizens who wish to travel abroad are able to do so freely. Exit visas -are required
 for citizens who intend to take up permanent residence in another country. There
 were no known cases of exit visas being denied during the year. The Government
 may deny passports to individuals in possessionA of state secrets, but denials may
 be appealed.
 Citizenship law provides the right to Ukrainian citizenship for all individuals who
 were born or lived in Ukraine before independdnce and to 'their descendants who
 lived outside Ukraine as of November 13, 1991. In order to be eligible, persons must
 not be citizens of other -countries and must submit their application by the year
 2000. Dual citizenship is not-recognized: The amended law also provides the right
 to citizenship for deported victims of political oppression like the Crimean Tatars.
 Refugees can acquire Ukrainian citizenship if they have lived legally in Ukraine for
 5 years and can communicate in the Ukrainian language. Since independence over
 1.5 million Ukrainians have returned to Ukraine, While over 1 niillion persons,
 mostly ethnic Russians, have left the country.
 The Government has not supported a foreigu-funded program to facilitate the
 travel to Ukraine of some emigrants who qualily for resettlement as refugees. Ap-
 proximately 260,000 Crimean Tatars have reituned-from exile to Crimea, mainly
 from Central Asia. Crimean Tatar leaders have complained that their community
 has not received'adequate assistance in resettling and that an onerous process of
 acquiring citizenship has excluded many of them from participating in elections and
 from the right to take part'in the privatization of land and state'assets. A 1997
 amendment to the citizenship law waives some of the usual residence and language
 requirements for returining deportees. This -expedited procedure of acquiring citizen-
 ship by -the deported victims ofpolitical oppression was expected to facilitate the ac-
 quisition 'of citizenship by Crimean Tatars. The 1997 amendments to the Citizenship
 Law allow deported persons, including Crimean Tatars, to acquire Ukrainian citi-
 zenship, without a mandatory 5-year term of residence in Ukraine and without
 Ukrainian language proficiency. As with any other would-be citizens, Crimean Ta-
 tars are required to provide official documents from their country of residence con-
 firming that they no longer are citizens of that country. An August agreement be-
 tween Ukraine and Uzbekistan (from which most Tatars arrive) was expected to
 make it easier for Tatars to relinquish Uzbek citizenship and acquire Ukrainian citi-
 zenship, but at year's end it was-unclear whether it will reduce the waiting period
 for Tatars to acquire citizenship.
 The 1993 Law on Refugees governs the treatment of refugees and entities xefu-
 gees to all the benefits accorded to citizens. The Government cooperates with the
 office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and refugee status is
 initially given for a 3-month term and isosubject to further extension. Under the Ref-
 ugee Law, refugees are entitled to material assistance. By October there were 3,101
 persons officially registered refugees (2,353 are Afghans); 1,056 are children. A com-
 mitment has been made to award refugee status to all Afghans who arrived in
 Ukraine before 1995. Under the new citizenship law, legally registered refugees can
 apply for citizenship after 5 years of permanent residence. Under the Refugee Law,
 refugees are entitled to material assistance. The Cabinet decided to start allocating
 funds in the 1999 national budget for payment of refugee pensions and small allow-
 ances for indigent refugees, plus transportation fare to a refugee center. In coopera-
 tion with the UNHCR in 1997, the Government established a refugee receiving cen-
 ter for 200 people in Vinnytsya. The Government plans to open four other centers
 elsewhere; however, no additional center has as yet been opened.
 Instances of police harassment of certain categories of refugees appear to have di-
 minished during the year.
 According to the State Committee for Nationalities and Migration, there is a first
 asylum policy under the law. There were no reports of forcible deportation of asylum
 seekers or refugees, and no reports of persons forced to return to countries where
 they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change the government peacefully. The
 Constitution provides universal suffrage for citizens at least 18 years of age and for
 periodic elections every 4 years for the Parliament and every 5 years for the Presi-
 dent. Presidential elections that resulted in a transfer of power took place in 1994.
 Parliamentary elections took place in 1994 and in March.
 
 
 1587
 Power is divided between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. Al-
 though nominally independent, the judicial branch in practice is influenced heavily
 by the executive (see Section i.e.). The President appoints the Prime Minister, who
 appoints the remainder of the Cabinet. The Prime Minister, as well as certain other
 appointments, such as the Prosecutor General, is subject to parliamentary approval.
 The Constitution grants the President limited power to pass binding decrees and di-
 rectives that have the power of law.
 International observers considered the March parliamentary elections to have
 been an improvement over those in 1994. The campaign was generally peaceful and
 there were no signs of wide scale fraud. However, the OSCE described the campaign
 as marred by instances of violence and other procedural flaws, including open voting
 and the presence of unauthorized personnel in the polling stations, "that rep-
 resented a serious shortcoming in the conduct of the campaign." In the preelection
 period, various forms of government pressure on the media served to limit the inde-
 pendence of the press (see Section 2.a.). In February the President issued a secret
 edict that strengthened the powers of presidentially appointed regional governors at
 the expense of democratically elected local councils. The Government allegedly used
 government agencies, especially the Tax Inspectorate, to disrupt or eliminate the
 businesses of political opponents prior to the elections. Election results in seven con-
 stituencies were declared invalid by courts or elections commissions and court pro-
 ceedings to review the election results for a number of Rada seats were not trans-
 parent. In two high profile cases, election commissions twice invalidated the vic-
 tories of government opponents Serhiy Holovatiy and Yuriy Orobets. Although
 Holovatiy was eventually seated in Parliament, at year's end Orobets status re-
 mained unclear. Both the original election and two subsequent by-elections have
 been annulled due to fraud. A third by-election was scheduled for early 1999.
 Women are active in political life but hold a disproportionately small percefitage
 of offices. Women hold 28 of the 450 seats in the Rada. Only two women hold min-
 isterial posts. The 18-member Constitutional Court has 2 female members. Jews are
 well represented among the political elite and hold several parliamentary seats.
 Many Crimean Tatars are unable to participate fully in the political process, pri-
 marily due to citizenship problems (see Section 2.d.).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and -ongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups operate with-
 out government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human
 rights cases. Government officials generally are cooperative and responsive to their
 views. However, inquiries into penal conditions, which are a significant human
 rights concern, are limited by their status as state secrets, and human rights groups
 reported more difficulties in investigating this area.
 In January the President signed the law creating the Parliamentary Commis-
 sioner on Human Rights, which is a constitutionally-mandated independent human
 rights Ombudsman. Parliament elected the first ombudsman in April. The human
 rights Ombudsman serves a 5-year term and, in principle, is invested by law with
 very broad powers. However, this year's budget provided no funds for the Ombuds-
 man's office staff, nor were accommodations provided. Since its inception, the staff
 has worked without salary. Moreover, the extent of the ombudsman's independence
 has not been established. When the Government arbitrarily detained several hun-
 dred enterprise directors in August for nonpayment of contributions to the state
 pension fund, the Ombudsman supported the Government's action, declaring that
 the enterprise directors had committed the real human rights abuse by preventing
 pensioners from receiving their only source of income. The Ombudsman's office has
 not yet released any reports.
 The law provides the Ombudsman with unrestricted and unannounced access to
 any public official, including the President; unrestricted access to any government
 installation; and oversight of implementation of human rights treaties and agree-
 ments signed by Ukraine. All citizens and current residents can address their con-
 cerns to the Ombudsman. The Ombudsman also serves as the intermediary between
 citizens and the Constitutional Court, since citizens cannot address the Court di-
 rectly. During the summer, the Ombudsman toured penal institutions and subse-
 quently submitted instructions for reforms-to the Ministry of Interior which, accord-
 ing to the Ombudsman, at least were partially implemented. In October the Om-
 budsman provided the expert opinion that served as the basis for the presidential
 veto of an antiterrorism bill. The Ombudsman determined that the bill described
 "terrorism" too vaguely and would have inhibited due process.
 
 
 1588
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race,- Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, -sex, and other
 grounds; however, due in part to the absence of an effective judicial system, the
 Government does not enforce these provisions effectively.
 Women.-Violence against women is reportedly pervasive. According to new sta-
 tistics compiled by United Nations Development Program, the number of reported
 rapes and attempted rapes decreased during recent years, but surveys indicate that
 the majority of rapes and other cases of physical abuse go unreported Past surveys
 by women's groups indicated that between 10 and 15 percent of women had been
 raped, and over 25 percent physically abused, in their lifetimes.
 The Criminal Code outlaws rape and "forced sex with a materially dependent per-
 son," which may allow prosecution for spousal rape. Spousal abuse is also illegal,
 but authorities often pressure women not to press charges against their husbands.
 Separate statistics on prosecutions for wife beating or on average sentences are not
 available. In 1997; the last year for which statistics are available, 1,510 criminal
 cases were opened for rape, 822 for sexual abuse, and 3 for sexual compulsion. Infor-
 mation on convictions was not available.
 Violence against women does not receive extensive media coverage, despite the ef-
 forts of human rights groups to highlight the problem. Hot lines, shelters, and other
 practical support for victims of sexual abuse are practically nonexistent. In August
 Kiev municipal authorities opened the country's first women's center. The Govern-
 ment announced plans to establish a network of shelters throughout the country,
 but by year's end it had not begun to implement these plans.
 Ukraine is, an important source country of girls and women trafficked to Central
 and-Western Europe and the Middle East for sexual exploitation. The International
 Organization for Migration estimated that 100,000 Ukrainians had been trafficked
 abroad for this purpose since 1991. A western sponsored Conference on the Preven-
 tion of Trafficking was held in Lviv in July that highlighted the problem for the
 Ukranian public. The Government took a step to address this problem in April with
 an amendment to the Criminal Code that imposes harsh penalties for-among other
 offenses-trafficking in human beings, including for sexual exploitation and pornog-
 raphy; however, the effectiveness of these steps has not yet been established. The
 authorities rarely prosecute men for engaging women in the explosively growing sec-
 tor of sexually exploitative work. However, in August two traffickers in Kryvy Rih
 were sentenced to 3 years in prison for trafficking minors to Western Europe. Non-
 governmental organizations (NGO's) claim that the militia receives bribes in return
 for ignoring this problem. Moreover, some reports alleged that public officials abet-
 ted or assisted organized criminal groups in trafficking women abroad. The Govern-
 ment, primarily due to lack of funds, is unable to assist victims effectively. Some
 NGO's, such as the indigenous NGO La Strada, began offering some support serv-
 ices for victims of trafficking, but also suffered from a shortage of funds.
 Women's groups reported that there was widespread sexual harassment in the
 workplace, including coerced sex. A part from the law that prohibits forced sex with
 a "materially dependent person," which applies to employees, there are inadequate
 legal safeguards against harassment. There have been no known cases of prosecu-
 tion for sexual harassment in the work place.
 Labor laws estabish the legal eqty of men and women, including equal pay
 for equal work, a principle that generally is observed. However, the economic crisis
 has harmed women disproportionately. Women are much more likely to be laid off
 than men. Women constitute approximately 60 p ercent of the unemployed popu-
 lation, and as many as 90 percent of newly unemployed persons.
 The Constitution and the Law on Protection of Motherhood and Childhood pro-
 hibit the employment of women in jobs that are hazardous to their health. For ex-
 ample, the law prohibits women from working at jobs that require them to lift more
 than 25 pounds at one time. However, despite implementation of a government pro-
 grai to combat dangerous labor, these laws remain poorly enforced, and the Min-
 istry of Labor estimated that 15 percent of working women are employed at hazard-
 ous jobs. Furthermore, human rights groups maintained that management selec-
 tively conforms to the law only as necessary to lay off or lire female workers. Many
 women's rights advocates fear that the law may be used to bar women from the best
 paying blue-collar jobs. By law pregnant women and mothers with small children
 enjoy paid maternity leave until their children reach the age of 3. This benefit is
 a disincentive for employers to hire women for responsible or career track jobs.
 Few women attain top managerial positions in state and private industry. Accord-
 ing to government statistics, 69.2 percent of the country's 213,000 state administra-
 tion jobs are held by women, including 45.2 per cent of the managerial positions.
 However, of the highest 'Tirst" and "second" category offices, only 5.6 percent in cen-
 
 
 1589
 
 tral or local governments are filled by women. (These numbers do not include the
 .power ministries," the Ministries of Defense, Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs, and
 e SBU, which have substantially more male employees at all levels.)
 Educational opportunities for woman generally have been, and continue to be,
 equal to those enjoyed by men.
 Children.-The Government is committed publicly to the defense of children's
 rights, but the deep economic crisis severely limits its ability to ensure these rights.
 The low priority that both the public and the Government attach to children's rights
 is reflected in the absence of groups that aggressively promote children's rights. For
 example, the widely acknowledged problem of growing violence and crime in and
 outside schools, especially the notoriously violent vocational schools, largely is ig-
 nored by the public and the Government.
 Free, universal education is compulsory until the age of 15. However, the public
 education system has deteriorated as a result of government financial disarray.
 Teachers often go unpaid for months. Increasing numbers of children from poor fam-
 ilies drop out of school, and illiteracy, which was previously very rare, has become
 a problem. Health care is provided equally to girls and boys, but economic problems
 have worsened the overall quality of the health care system.
 There were increased cases of homeless children, who usually fled poor orphanage
 or poor domestic conditions. Although statistics are unavailable, drug use and child
 prostitution among these children are widespread and received substantial media
 attention during the year. Several charity groups were formed to assist these chil-
 dren, but they have not been able to reduce the problem. In 1997 the All-Ukrainian
 Committee for Protection of Children released survey results that reveal every fifth
 or sixth child of both sexes under age 18 suffers from sexual harassment (including
 every third girl), and every tenth girl is raped.
 Deteriorating conditions in the state orphanages led the Government to encourage
 families to provide foster homes for orphans and to facilitate the establishment of
 private, government-supervised orphanages. Currently, there are 75 such orphan-
 ages with some 800 children. Public concern over the fate of children adopted by
 foreigners led to a 1997 amendment to the adoption law, which provided for thor-
 ough court examination of each case and follow-up monitoring of the children's well-
 being. To curb illegal adoption, the April amendment to the Criminal Code pre-
 scribed up to 15 years' imprisonment for trafficking in children and illegal adoption.
 However, there had been no known successful cases of its application by year's end.
 For example members of an organized criminal group who were tried this summer
 in Uzhhorod for the alleged trafficking of children to Russia for begging, crime, and
 organ transplantation, only were fined because the witnesses withdrew their testi-
 mony.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled,
 but the Government has been unable to support programs targeted at increasing op-
 portunities for the disabled. The law mandates access to buildings and other public
 facilities for the disabled, but it is enforced poorly.
 Religious Minorities.-Anti-Semitism exists on an individual and societal basis.
 Some ultranationalist groups and newspapers continued to publish and distribute
 anti-Semitic tracts regularly. Public officials did not take adequate steps to condemn
 anti-Semitic statements and have not enforced the Criminal Code prohibitions
 against inciting interethnic hatred. Anti-Semitic stereotypes are widespread among
 the general population. Anti-Semitic incidents, such as an October cemetery dese-
 cration in Chernivtsi by ultranationalist groups, continue to occur but, according to
 local Jewish organizations, declined in number and were concentrated in western
 regions of the country.
 In July the Cabinet issued an ordinance prohibiting construction and privatization
 on previous and current Jewish cemeteries. However, some construction was re-
 ported at the cemetery in Lviv, destroyed by the Nazis in World War II and now
 the site of the city's central market. The cemetery in Berdychiv was returned to the
 Jewish community early in the year, and restoration has begun.
 There were no arrests made in the 1997 firebombing of the Kharkiv Israeli cul-
 tural center, nor have there been any prosecutions for desecrating Jewish ceme-
 teries in 1997.
 Jewish groups maintained that they continued to face obstacles in reacquiring
 community properties confiscated during the Soviet period. The small Reform Jew-
 ish community reported that it was subject to pressure and discrimination from the
 dominant Orthodox Jewish organizations.
 Evangelical Christian missionaries reported some instances of societal discrimina-
 tion against members of their churches, such as salary cuts, layoffs, and public criti-
 cism for betraying "native religions."
 
 
 1590
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Frequent harassment of racial minorities is
 a problem. Police officials routinely detain dark-skinned persons for arbitrary docu-
 ment checks. In addition there were increased reports of racially motivated violence
 against persons of African and Asian heritage. Representatives of these groups
 claimed that police officials routinely ignored, and sometimes abetted, violence
 against them.
 Roma face considerable societal discrimination. Opinion polls have shown that
 among all ethnic groups, the level of intolerance is highest towards Roma. In the
 Transcarpathian region in particular, Roma have been subject to violence and abuse
 by police (see Section 1.c.).
 The Constitution provides for "the free development, use and protection of the
 Russian language and other minority languages in Ukraine." This compromise
 builds on a 1991 Law on National Minorities, which played an instrumental role in
 preventing ethnic strife by allowing individual citizens to use their respective na-
 tional languages in conducting personal business and by allowing minority groups
 to establish their own schools. Nonetheless, some pro-Russian organizations in east-
 ern Ukraine complained about the increased use of Ukrainian in schools and in the
 media. They claim that their children are disadvantaged when taking academic en-
 trance examinations, since all appicants are required to take a Ukrainian language
 test. Some regional councils attempted unsuccessfully in 1997 to give the Russian
 language official status alongside Ukrainman.
 In Crimea Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar minorities credibly complain of discrimi-
 nation by the Russian majority ana demand that Ukrainian and Tatar languages
 be given equal treatment to Russian. While the Crimean government, pleading in-
 sufficient funds, did not assent to requests from the Crimean Tatar community for
 assistance in reestablishing its cultural heritage through Tatar language publica-
 tions and educational institutions, the central government is working with the
 UNHCR, the OSCE, and the International Organization for Migration on support
 for the Crimean Tatar community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to join trade
 unions to defend "professional, social and economic interests." Under the Constitu-
 tion, all trade unions have equal status, and no government permission is required
 to establish a trade union. The 1992 Law on Citizens' Organizations (which includes
 trade unions) stipulates noninterference by public authorities in the activities of
 these organizations, which have the right to establish and join federations on a vol-
 untary basis. In principle all workers and civil servants (including members of the
 armed forces) are free to form unions. In practice the Government discourages cer-
 tain categories of workers, for example, nuclear power plant employees, from doing
 so. A new trade union law to replace Soviet-era legislation remains before the
 Rada's Labor Committee.
 The successor to the Soviet trade unions, known as the Federation of Trade
 Unions (FPU), has begun to work independently of the Government and has been
 vocal in advocating workers' right to strike. The FPU has supported the protests of
 miners and other professions over unpaid wages. In March the FPU held rallies in
 protest over unpaid wages. In May and June, it supported large-scale protests by
 miners. As during the Soviet era, -most FPU affiliates work closely with manage-
 ment. Following President Kuchma's appointment of the head of the FPU-affiliated
 coal miners' union to be director of the national coal monopoly, the FPU ended sup-
 port for striking miners. It did not support, for example, the August mine strike in
 Lugansk. Enterprise managers are free to join the FPU. In 1997 the FPU leadership
 created a political party, the All-Ukrainian Party of Workers, which is virtually in-
 distinguishable from the FPU.
 Independent unions now provide an alternative to the official unions in many sec-
 tors of the economy. The Independent Miners' -Union of Ukraine (NPGU), unions
 representing pilots, civil air traffic controllers, locomotive engineers, aviation ground
 crews, and other unions operate either independently or within one of three national
 confederations. Independent union membership is approximately 100,000 while
 FPU-affiliated unions have between 17 and 23 million members, depending on the
 methodology of the counting process. Independent unions have claimed unsuccess-
 fully a share of the former Soviet trade unions' huge property and funds, especially
 the social insurance benefits fund, a Soviet-era legacy traditionally controlled by the
 official unions. In June a government decree handed over control of the social insur-
 ance benefits funds from the unions to the government Treasury. In protest 20
 unions suspended their membership in the Presidential Social Partnership Council.
 In response to their protests, the Government retracted its decision, and the unions
 returned to the Council.
 
 
 1591
 
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "to defend one's economic and so-
 cial interests." The Constitution states that strikes must not jeopardize national se-
 curity, public health, or the rights and liberties of others. The law does not extend
 this right to members of the procuracy, judiciary, armed forces, security services,
 law enforcement agencies, and public servants. However, a new Law on Labor Dis-
 putes Resolution, passed in March, extends the right to strike to employees of "con-
 tining process plants," for example, metallurgical factories, provided that they give
 15 days advance notice of their intent to strike. The law prohibits strikes that jeop-
 ardize life or health, the environment, or that can hinder disaster, accident, or epi-
 demic-related operations.
 The law does not prohibit specifically strikes based on political demands. The law
 prohibits strikes based on demands to change the constitutional order, the state bor-
 ders, or the administrative division of Ukraine, or on demands that infringe on
 human rights. The Government has relied on the prosecutors and the courts to deal
 with strikes that it considered illegal. The law does not extend the immunity from
 discipline or dismissal to strikers who take part in strikes that later are declared
 illegal by the courts. A union that organized an illegal strike is liable for the strike-
 inflicted losses.
 Coal miners in eastern Ukraine struck several times during the year to demand
 unpaid wages. In June several thousand miners marched on Kiev and picketed gov-
 ernment offices for several days. In December two miners burned themselves alive
 in the Luhansk oblast. Teachers, primarily in western Ukraine, also went on strike
 for unpaid wages throughout the year. In December teachers from a school district
 in Ternopil oblast began a hunger strike that received extensive media attention.
 At year's end, the teachers often continued to be without pay and to strike at irregu-
 lar intervals.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies. The NPGU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Law on Enterprises
 states that joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues concerning
 wages, working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the enter-
 prise level. Overlapping spheres of responsibility frequently impede the collective
 bargaining process. The Government, in agreement with trade unions, establishes
 wages in each industrial sector and invites all unions to participate in the negotia-
 tions. The Law on Labor Disputes Resolution that came into force in March provides
 for the establishment of an arbitration service and a National Mediation and Rec-
 onciliation Service to mediate labor disputes. However, these services have not yet
 been established.
 The manner in which the collective bargaining law is applied prejudices the bar-
 gaining process against the independent unions and favors the official unions (affili-
 ates of the FPU). Most workers never are informed that they are not obligated to
 join the official union. Renouncing membership in the official union and joining an
 independent union can be bureaucratically onerous and typically is discouraged by
 management. The collective bargaining law prohibits antiunion discrimination.
 Under the law, disputes are supposed to be resolved by the courts. There have been
 cases in which such disputes have not been settled in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to occur. The Government does not prohibit spe-
 cifically forced and bonded labor by children; however, the Constitution and the
 Labor Code prohibit forced labor generally, and theer wre no reports of such prac-
 tices during the year.
 Human rights groups described as compulsory labor the common use of army
 conscripts and youths in the alternative service for refurbishing and building pri-
 vate houses for army and government officials. Student groups protested against a
 presidential decree obliging college and university graduates,. whose studies have
 been paid for by the Government, to work in the public sector at government-des-
 ignated jobs for 3 years or to fully repay the cost of their education. Students de-
 scribed the decree as an anticonstitutional attempt to introduce compulsory labor,
 as the Constitution provides for free choice of job and one's agreement to work. The
 Government stated that the decree would cover oly students who entered higher
 education institutions in 1997 and thereafter. The extent of enforcement of the de-
 cree is unknown. However, human rights groups reported complaints from medical
 and law students that they had been forced to accept government-assigned jobs or
 not receive their diplomas.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employrnent.-The mini-
 mum employment age is 17; however, in certain nonhazardous industries enter-
 
 
 1592
 prises may negotiate with the Government to hire employees between 14 and 17
 years of age, with the consent of one parent. The Constitution provides for general
 secondary education. School attendance is compulsory to the age of 15, a regulation
 vigorously enforced by the Ministry of Education. However, since the Soviet era the
 number of dropouts has increased significantly, mostly because of rising poverty.
 The Criminal Code prescribes up to 5 years in prison for involving children in crimi-
 nal activities, drinking, begging, prostitution, gambling, or other exploitation. The
 Government does not prohibit specifically forced and bonded labor by children, but
 there were no reports that it occurred (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum monthly wage and pension is
 about $15.28 (55 hryvnias) effective in September, and the officially reported aver-
 age monthly wage is about $39.44 (142 hryvnias), which does not provide a decent
 standard of living for a worker and family. Moreover, millions of persons go unpaid
 for many months because of shrinking budget revenue. In 1997 the Parliament
 raised the minimum monthly pension to the official subsistence level of some $20.50
 (73.7 hryvnias), but the Government has not complied because of budgetary con-
 straints. It is estimated that some 50 percent of the population officially live below
 that line, although the practice of underreporting sources of income is widespread.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek,-a 24-hour period of
 rest per week, and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year. Stagnation in some
 industries, for example, defense, significantly reduced the-workweek for some cat-
 egories of workers.
 The law contains occupational safety and health standards, but these frequently
 are ignored in -practice. According to official statistics, the accident rate has in-
 creased 1 2 times since independence in 1991. In 1997 1,646 persons were killed
 and 51,888 injured in accidents at work, with an equally high figure this year. Lax
 safety standards and aging equipment caused many serious accidents, resulting in
 over 15,000 injuries and 295 deaths in 1998. According to the Coal Mining Ministry,
 in the first half of the year there were 5.5 deaths per 1 million tons of coal, which
 is a ratio 1/2 times higher than the rate for the industry in 1997. In the first half
 of 'the -year, there were 13 major mine accidents with many casualties, including 84
 miners who were killed and 144 who were injured. In theory workers have a legal
 right to, remove themselves from dangerous work, situations without jeopardizing
 continued employment. In reality; however, independent trade unionists reported
 that asserting this right would result in retaliation or perhaps dismissal by manage-
 ment.
