Ukraine
2008 proved to be another year of political turmoil in Ukraine. The longtime conflict
between President Viktor Yushchenko and parliament continued, despite the
appointment of Yulia Timoshenko as prime minister in late 2007 and the creation
of a coalition government with her party. During August’s armed conflict in
Georgia and its breakaway region South Ossetia the political situation deteriorated,
and in September the coalition government collapsed, as the president and
prime minister could not agree on the proper response to Russia’s use of military
force in the conflict. In October Yushchenko issued a decree dissolving parliament.
When their dispute went to the courts, both sides attempted to interfere in
the judicial process: Yushchenko abolished a court that ruled in favor of a
Timoshenko challenge to his decree calling early parliamentary elections, and
parliamentarians from Timoshenko’s party physically disrupted a subsequent
hearing of Yushchenko’s appeal against that ruling.
Despite adoption of some important legislation, Ukraine’s human rights record
continued to be poor, with torture and ill-treatment in detention remaining commonplace.
Employment discrimination against women, hostility to asylum seekers,
hate attacks on ethnic minorities, and human rights abuses fueling Ukraine’s
staggering HIV/AIDS epidemic are all problems that the Ukrainian government
still fails to address effectively.
Criminal Justice System
A significant victory for Ukraine’s human rights community was the adoption of
the Criminal Justice and Law Enforcement Authorities reform, signed by President
Yushchenko on April 8, 2008. The reform was designed to bring the cumbersome
criminal justice system into line with international law. In particular, it aimed to
improve pretrial investigation procedures, strengthen protections for victims’
rights, humanize the conditions and procedures of criminal punishment, and end
corruption in the judicial process.
Torture and ill-treatment in detention persist, however, as well as a myriad of abusive
conditions for detainees: overcrowding in jails and prisons, lack of adequate
sanitation, and too little light, food, water, and medical care.
Media Freedom
In March 2008 three former Interior Ministry police were convicted of the 2000
murder of journalist Georgy Gongadze. But there appeared to be no progress in
the search for those who ordered the murder. Media activists continue to demand
that this be meaningfully investigated.
Maxim Birovash, a correspondent for Business magazine, was assaulted in the
elevator of his apartment building on December 7, 2007. Two men knocked him to
the ground and stole his bag, which contained internal correspondence of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs, as well as other documents related to Birovash’s
investigation into corruption in the issuance of passports. One assailant was
detained, tried, and sentenced to five years in prison. The second man was not
found, and the stolen documents were not recovered.
Employment Discrimination against Women
Although Ukraine has adopted legislation to ensure gender equality in employment,
including the Law on Equal Rights and Opportunities for Men and Women
and amendments to the Labor Code prohibiting gender discrimination in employment
and pay, research shows that women do not enjoy equal access to employment
opportunities. Both public and private employers regularly specify preferences
for men, and discriminate on the basis of age or the physical appearance
of potential female candidates during recruitment. Women are very often forced
into the low-paying, unregulated informal economy, and are disproportionately
affected by unemployment.
Treatment of Asylum Seekers and Migrants
The worrisome practice of removing refugees and asylum seekers continued in
2008. With no clear migration policy, Ukraine continues to deny asylum seekers
protection and often refuses to grant refugee status on murky procedural
grounds. Many migrants face deportation back to countries where they face torture
or ill-treatment. In March 2008 the Ukrainian government forcibly returned 11
ethnic Tamil refugees to Sri Lanka, despite the fact that all 11 were registered with
the Kyiv office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Oleg Kuznetsov, a Russian national, was arrested on July 19, 2007, and held for a
year pending extradition. In March 2008 the State Committee on Nationalities
and Religion granted him refugee status. On July 21 the district administrative
court of Kyiv turned down the prosecutor’s appeal against the decision to grant
Kuznetsov asylum. Nevertheless, he was extradited to Russia a week later by
order of the prosecutor general, despite his refugee status and in violation of
Ukrainian refugee law.
Migrants and asylum seekers in detention commonly suffer violations of their fundamental
rights to legal counsel, to be informed of their rights, to inform a third
party of their detention, and to a fair trial.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination against Ethnic Minorities
Ukrainian human rights organizations note that nationalistic informal groups of
young people have been on the rise since 2005, carrying out physical assaults
and attacks on immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers, foreign students, and people
of non-Slavic appearance including Roma. In the first four months of 2008 the
Ministry of Internal Affairs reported 160 crimes against foreign nationals, including
seven murders. In response, the government created special criminal investigation
units for fighting racially motivated crimes, which have being operating in
several Ukrainian cities.
Crimean Tatars continue to endure discrimination, including unequal allocation of
land, unequal employment opportunities, unequal access to places of worship,
and unavailability of education in their native language.
Human Rights Abuses Fueling the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
The Ukrainian National AIDS Center reported nearly 11,000 newly registered cases
of HIV infection in the first seven months of 2008; 47 percent of newly registered
cases are among injection drug users. NGOs report continuing police interference
with the delivery of HIV prevention information and services. Those at highest risk
of HIV/AIDS, including drug users and sex workers, are particularly vulnerable to
police harassment and are frequently driven away from lifesaving services.
The government has taken important steps to increase access for drug users to
medication-assisted treatment (MAT) with methadone and buprenorphine, which
are widely recognized as among the most effective means to treat opiate dependence.
In December 2007 the government lifted restrictions on methadone
imports, and as of October 2008 more than 1,700 people received methadone or
buprenorphine in 51 healthcare institutions in 24 regions of Ukraine. There is no
MAT in prison, however, which means that drug users on MAT are forced to suffer
abrupt withdrawal when taken into state custody.
The Ministry of Health has taken measures to expand provision of antiretroviral
therapy for people living with HIV, although not on a scale sufficient to address
the need for it. When selecting candidates for antiretroviral therapy, medical institutions
frequently discriminate against drug users on the unfounded assumption
that they will not adhere to a rigorous course of treatment.
Key International Actors
In January 2008, then European Union Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson and
Ukrainian Vice Prime Minister Hryhory Nemyrya signed an agreement outlining
final terms for Ukraine’s World Trade Organization membership. At the twelfth EUUkraine
Cooperation Council, the EU complimented Ukraine on its parliamentary
elections in September 2007, calling them “a lively campaign and genuine political
competition.” At the EU-Ukraine summit in Paris in September 2008 EU officials
underlined their support for Ukraine’s efforts to carry out vital political and
economic reforms.
The sharpening presidential-parliamentary conflict and ongoing problematic
human rights conditions were factors in NATO’s deferring a decision to offer membership
to Ukraine in April 2008.
Ukraine was reviewed under the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review mechanism in May 2008. The outcome of this review was a set of recommendations
related to discrimination and hate crimes, ending torture, investigating
violence against journalists, and creating a more orderly process for refugees
and asylum seekers in accordance with UNHCR guidelines.
The Legal Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) called for a proper investigation to bring to justice those responsible
for ordering the murder of journalist Georgy Gongadze. After a fact-finding
mission in 2007, PACE officials called on Ukraine to finally launch reforms of the
judicial and penal systems.
The number of individual applications to the European Court of Human Rights
against Ukraine has been steadily increasing over the years; in 2007 there were
4,502 applications allocated to a decision body, and a further 4,144 in the first 10
months of 2008. The court handed down 109 judgments against Ukraine in 2007,
mostly concerning torture and discrimination. Between January and November 1,
2008, the court found against Ukraine in 77 cases, mainly involving fair trial and
property rights.
