 Over the past year, Ukraine continued to make progress in the development of
 a democratic society based on the rule of law. A president and parliament elected
 for 4-year terms share responsibility for governance. In practice, the Presidency has
 become stronger than the Parliament in the 4 years of independence, and the divi-
 sion of power has become the most contested issue in drafting a new constitution.
 Judges are beginning to assert their independence and their right to be free from
 improper interference, but the court system   remains woefully underfunded,
 understaffed, and overworked.
 Ukraine took steps toward replacing the anachronistic 1978 Constitution of the
 Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. The document was partly superseded by a June
 8 constitutional accord between President Leonid Kuchma and-Parliament (Rada)
 that increased the President's control over cabinet appointments and executive
 branch operations, but it remains in force pending adoption of a new constitution.
 Under the constitutional accord, the President can appoint executive branch officials
 without Rada confirmation. Both major branches of government committed them-
 selves to presenting a new constitution to the voters by the spring of 1996. Govern-
 ment and parliamentary leaders heralded the agreement as a demonstration of their
 determination to resolve internal differences by democratic, peaceful means.
 The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVS),
 and the Ministry of Defense all have equal status and report to the President
 through the Cabinet. The chairmen of these institutions sit on the Cabinet of Min-
 isters and simultaneously chair the Cabinet's executive committees responsible for
 each of their ministries. The armed forces have remained largely outside of politics.
 Since mid-1994, Ukraine has had a civilian Defense Minister. The SBU has the
 power to affect the political process through criminal investigations against politi-
 cians and influential businessmen. Members of the security forces committed human
 rights abuses.
 The economy is in the midst of a painful transition from rigid central planning
 to a market-based system. According to official statistics about half of the workforce
 is formally employed in manufacturing, with the balance divided between services
 and agriculture, though in reality many industrial enterprises have reduced or
 stopped production, forcing many out of work. Exports are diversified and include
 metals, chemicals, sugar, and semi-finished goods. Annual per capita income is ap-
 proximately $1,200. President Kuchma's economic reform program, initiated in the
 fall of 1994, achieved partial macroeconomic stabilization. Hyperinflation was cur-
 tailed, and the private sector grew impressively, even if this growth was not fully
 reflected in official government statistics. The private sector now represents a sub-
 stantial portion of the economy. However, Ukraine remains a country in economic
 crisis. Industrial output continued to decline, which led to pressure to slow the re-
 form process and relax the government's tight fiscal policy.
 Overall, Ukraine continued to make significant progress toward building a law-
 based civil society. Reports of human rights violations, already low in 1994, de-
 creased in 1995. However, problems remain in the unreformed legal and prison sys-
 tems, occasional government attempts to control the press, beatings by police and
 prison officials, limits on freedom of association, restrictions on foreign religious or-
 ganizations, societal anti-Semitism, some discrimination against women, and ethnic
 tensions in the Crimea. While progress has been made toward ensuring the inde-
 pendence of the judiciary, the Soviet tradition of political interference in judicial de-
 cisions continues to affect the judicial process.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by government agents, but the line between politically motivated killing and
 criminal activities has become difficult to distinguish. The Government's inability to
 stem the economic decline and check the growth of violent, organized criminal activ-
 ity had major repercussions. Politicians increasingly became the victims-whether
 thrughkinapins or kilings--of organized criminal goups, aided sometimes, ei-
 ther actively or passively, by corrupt officials. The number of contract killings, often
 targeted against managers of state-owned enterprises, increased in 1995. In a 2-
 month period three directors of metallurgy plants were assassinated. No suspects
 have been identified. Politicians were also targeted because of their influence over
 state-owned enterprises.
 The pervasiveness of organized crime and its undermining of governmental au-
 thority was particularly serious in the Crimean peninsula. The central Government
 
 
 1086
 
 in Kiev lacks institutional control and Crimean authorities are widely alleged to be
 compromised by ties to organized criminal elements. In one case, "mafia" thugs beat
 to death two Crimean Tatar market vendors, sparking rioting and a confrontation
 between Tatars and Ministry of Internal Affairs troops, during which two more Ta-
 tars were killed. No suspects were prosecuted.
 Combating the growth of organized crime and official corruption is a key govern-
 ment objective. A presidential commission, headed by a deputy prime minister, co-
 ordinates the activities of law-enforcement agencies. The Government is also consid-
 ering the creation of a National Bureau of Investigation to handle the investigation
 and prosecution of high-profile cases. There have also been signs of internal reform
 designed to root out corruption. The top levels of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
 have been purged and, according to the Ministry, 2,400 police officers were punished
 for infractions of the law or regulations. After being convicted of crimes, 419 police
 officers were imprisoned-a significant increase over last year.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The January 1994 disappearance of Mikhaylo Boychyshyn, a prominent leader of
 the Popular Movement of Ukraine (RUKH), remains unsolved.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture; however, police and prison officials regularly
 beat detainees and prisoners. There is no effective mechanism for registering com-
 plaints about mistreatment or for obtaining redress. The Government made no
 nown efforts during the year to end the practice or to punish officials who commit-
 ted such abuses.
 Conditions of pretrial detention routinely fail to meet basic human rights stand-
 ards. Inmates are sometimes held in "investigative isolation" for extended periods
 and subject to intimidation and mistreatment by jail guards. Overcrowding is com-
 mon in blocks for prisoners who have been charged with a crime and are awaiting
 trial or are in investigative detention.
 Prison conditions for convicted inmates appear to comply fully with minimum
 international standards and the Government permits visits by human rights mon-
 itors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that police authorities
 may detain a person suspected of a crime for 3 days without a warrant. A prosecu-
 tor must issue an arrest order if the period of detention exceeds 3 days. The maxi-
 mum period of detention after charges have been filed is 1% years. The law permits
 citizens to appeal the legality of an arrest either to the court or to the prosecutor.
 As citizens gain a better understanding of their rights under a 1992 law, they are
 increasingly filing appeals with the courts. The authorities have dismissed some
 prosecutors for not adhering to legal guidelines.
 A law in effect from July 1994 through June 1995, permitted "preventive" deten-
 tion of persons for up to 30 days without the filing of charges. the measure was
 instituted as a means to combat organized crime. According to data obtained by the
 Rada Commission on Law and Order, however, a majority of the people detained
 under the decree were never charged and only 5 perccnt were members of organized
 crime groups. The Rada refuse d the President's request to extend the terms of the
 decree.
 By law, a judge must initiate a trial within 3 weeks from the time charges are
 filed. But this limit is not always met by the overloaded court system, where months
 may pass before a defendant is finally brought to court. According to official statis-
 tics for the first quarter of 1995, out of 9,784 persons detained, 554 were released
 without charges being filed. By law, detainees are permitted access to a defense at-
 torney, who is provided without charge to the indigent, from the moment of deten-
 tion or the filing of charges, whichever comes first. However, it has been credibly
 alleged that individuals held under preventive detention frequently have been de-
 nied timely access to counsel. In addition, there are insufficient numbers of defense
 attorneys to protect suspects from unlawful, interminable imprisonment and deplor-
 able conditions. Furthermore, there is no public defender system for indigents to re-
 place the previous method of providing attorneys from the state system. There is
 no attorney-client privilege. The prisoner may talk to a lawyer only in the presence
 of the person who made the arrest. To protect the defendant, each investigative file
 must contain a document signed by the defendant and his counsel attesting that the
 defendant's rights were explained to him in the presence of an attorney. An appeals
 court may dismiss a conviction or order a new trial if this document is missing. As
 defendants became aware of their rights, they increasingly insisted on observance
 of these procedures. However, many still were not aware, and hence did not take
 advantage, of these procedures. Defense attorneys' fees also were prohibitively ex-
 pensive for many defendants.
 
 
 1087
 Exile as a punishment no longer exists in the law and the Government observes
 this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The criminal justice system generally follows the
 former Soviet model. Several modifications have been made, including a December
 1991 law modifying the system of prosecution and a June 1992 law, not yet imple-
 mented, authorizing the creation of a constitutional court. The leadership of both
 the executive and legislative branches has formally supported the establishment of
 an independent judiciary. However, the judiciary remains subject to outside pres-
 sures and further major structural reforms are required. Ambitious judicial reform
 proposals have been discussed at various times since independence. Further consid-
 eration of these reforms, however, is on hold pending completion of a new constitu-
 tion.
 Under the constitutional accord, ti-e President and the Rada pledged to appoint
 a constitutional court to interpret the ever-growing body of law and mediate dis-
 putes between the executive and legislative branches. By year's end (6 months after
 the accord was signed), the court had still not been appointed, perpetuating the dis-
 equilibrium in the balance of powers. The court's absence was felt immediately fol-
 lowing the completion of the constitutional accord when the Rada and the President
 came into conflict over the rules for dismissing the Prosecutor General.
 The court system is divided into courts of general jurisdiction and arbitration, or
 commercial, courts. The courts of general jurisdiction are divided into criminal and
 civil sections. The courts are organized on three levels: rayon courts (district, also
 known as people's courts); oblast (regional) courts; and the Supreme Court. Cases
 are decided by judges who sit singly, or in groups of three for more serious cases.
 All may act as the court of first instance depending on the nature and seriousness
 of the crime. A case heard in the first instance by the Supreme Court, therefore,
 may not be appealed or reviewed. There are no clear rules to determine which court
 first hears a case. As a rule, military tribunals handle cases involving military per-
 sonnel only.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are organized into offices at the rayon, oblast, and
 republic levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General, ap-
 pointed by the Rada and President. Prosecutors and defense attorneys by law have
 equal status before the courts. In practice, however, prosecutors still are very influ-
 ential because court proceedings are not conducted in an adversarial manner. The
 prosecutor directs all investigations of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the SBU,
 or he may use the investigative resources of his office.
 Oblast and Supreme Court judges may not be members of political parties and
 must have at least 5 years of legal experience. The Rada selects judges on the basis
 of recommendations from the Ministry of Justice, based in part on examination re-
 sults. The Prosecutor General and his deputy are nominated by the President and
 confirmed by the Rada. Regional and district prosecutors are appointed by the Pros-
 ecutor General. Many current judges and prosecutors were appointed in Soviet
 times when political influence pervaded the criminal justice system. It is unclear
 how free the judiciary is from influence and intimidation by the executive branch
 of government. Particularly at the regional level, judges, prosecutors, and other
 court officials appear to remain closely attuned to local government interests. Orga-
 nized crime elements also have influenced court decisions.
 While the defendant is presumed innocent, conviction rates have not changed
 from the Soviet era. Nearly 99 percent of completed cases result in convictions.
 Judges frequently send cases unlikely to end in convictions back to the prosecutor
 for additional investigation." Such cases may then be dropped or closed, occasion-
 ally without informing the court or the defendant. It is commonly believed that sus-
 pects frequently bribe court officials to drop charges before cases go to trial. Con-
 sequently, conviction rates are a somewhat misleading ststistic.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Lawyers for former parliamentary
 aide Viktor Bozhenar, arrested in March, and former member of Parliament Leopold
 Taburianskiy, arrested in August (both on corruption charges), alleged that their cli-
 ents were victims of political repression.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.---Search
 warrants issued by prosecutors, not judges, are required and utilized in most cases.
 The SBU may, however, conduct intrusive surveillance and searches without a v'ar-
 rant on national security grounds. Human rights observers report receiving no com-
 plaints of invasion of privacy by the SBU. According to the SBU charter, persons
 subject to surveillance must be informed after a month's time. The Prosecutor Gen-
 eral's office has oversight responsibility over the SBU, but the extent to which it
 utilizes that authority to monitor SBU activities and to curb excesses by security
 officials is unknown.
 
 
 1088
 The remnants of Soviet control mechanisms survive in many guises. Militia per-
 sonnel have the right to stop vehicles arbitrarily and need no probable cause to ini-
 tiate extensive document checks and inspection of all parts of the vehicle and its
 contents. This has become a great source of and inducement to corruption in the
 militia: citizens who often have committed no violation, or only a minor one, prefer
 to pay a bribe to avoid time-consuming inspections.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A 1991 law provides for freedom of speech and
 the print media. Criticism of the Government is tolerated. The broadcast media re-
 main under state ownership and are managed by the State Committee on Television
 and Radio (Derzhteleradio). Under current legislation, private and foreign compa-
 nies are entitled to establish and operate transmission facilities, provided that they
 obtain a license from the National Council on Television and Radio. Russian state
 television (the "Ostankino" channel) continues to broadcast on Ukraine's airwaves
 under an agreement with Derzhteleradio. The National Council and Derzhteleradio
 also permit private media companies access to the airwaves under contract and
 have agreed in principle to refrain from influencing progamming content. In prac-
 tice, however, isolatedcases of censorship and attempted censorship of reporting on
 internal political developments have occurred.
 The print media demonstrate a tendency towards self-censorship on matters sen-
 sitive to the Government. The executive branch, through the Ministry of Press and
 Information, subsidizes the operations of some large-circulation publications. Inde-
 pendent newspapers have also been established which are free to function on a
 purely commercial basis. There are concerns, however, that the dependence of coin-
 - mercial structures on government patronage inhibits their criticism of the Govern-
 ment. At the local and regional levels, editorial independence is even more cir-
 cumscribed by these factors. Foreign-owned newspapers are permitted.
 In November 1994, President Kuchma abolished a government committee for the
 protection of state secrets -that had enjoyed broadly defined powers over all media.
 The committee was absorbed into the Ministry of Press and Information, where it
 is now the "Main Department for the Protection of State Secrets." According to jour-
 nalists, this department has not interfered with the practice of their craft. A local
 court however, ordered the closure of the newspaper Oppositsiya that had published
 scatological and sexual caricatures of the President and members of his staft. Offi-
 cials involved with the case claimed the presidential administration initiated the ac-
 tion and prescribed the penalty. Oppositsiya was the first newspaper to be forced
 to close in Ukraine since independence.
 Reporting on organized crime and its connections with the Government is becom-
 ing increasingly bold, particularly with regard to crime. Reporting on this topic is
 not risk free and journalists contend that they have been subject to threats-includ-
 ing the threat of arrest-for aggressively reporting on official corruption.
 While the major universities are state-owned, they now operate ostensibly under
 full autonomy. Academic freedom within universities, however, is an underdevel-
 oped and poorly understood concept. University administrators are traditionally con-
 servative establishment figures in Ukraine and possess the power to silence profes-
 sors with whom they disagree by denying the possibility to publish or more directly
 by withholding pay or housing benefits. This atmosphere tends to limit the free spir-
 it of inquiry. Several private and religiously affiliated universities have been found-
 ed (or refounded) in Ukraine since independence, and all operate without any re-
 ported interference or harassment by the State.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Law on Public Assembly
 of 1989 stipulates that organizations must apply for permission to the respective
 local administration 10 days before a planned demonstration. Participants in dem-
 onstrations are prohibited by law from instigating violence or ethnic conflict and
 from calling for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. Demonstrations
 may not interfere with traffic, take place near the Rada when it is in session, or
 otherwise hinder public order. In Kiev officials routinely granted permits, unli-
 censed demonstrations were common, and occurred without police interference, even
 at the Rada when it was in session.
 On July 18, elite MVS troops used excessive force in breaking up a funeral cere-
 mony for the patriarch of one of the competing Orthodox churches. Several dozen
 people, including pensioners, were injured during the incident. President Kuchma
 expressed "great regret" for the violence, and the Minister of Internal Affairs sus-
 pended three high-ranking officers involved in the incident and initiated a govern-
 ment inquiry. President Kuchma condemned the conduct of the troops (see Section
 2.c.).
 
 
 1089
 The 1992 law on public organizations prohibits the State from financing political
 parties and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties may
 not receive funds from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. The law pro-
 hibits the establishment of organizations advocating the violent overthrow of the
 Government and constitutional order or undermining Ukraine's state security by
 collaborating with other states. It bars political parties from having administrative
 or organizational structures abroad. The law prohibits police authorities, members
 of the armed forces, and executive branch officials from joining political parties, but
 many such persons nonetheless publicly associate themselves with specific parties.
 In late 1994, an ultra-nationalist organization, the Ukrainian National Assembly
 (UNA), after repeated unsuccessful attempts was registered by the Ministry of Jus-
 tice as a political party. In the wake of increasingly provocative behavior by UNA
 members, culminating in a violent clash with police during the Patriarch's funeral,
 the Justice Ministry revoked the UNA's registration. The Ministry contended that
 the UNA had provided false information in its original application for registration
 and had subsequently advocated fascism, violence, ethmccintlerance, and-the forc-
 ible overthrow of the constitutional order. In addition, the group was accused of
 criminal activities including assault, illegal possession of Firearms, paramilitary
 trainin', and involvement in foreign wars (in Chechnya and Abkhazia). The Min-
 istry al o concluded that the UNA was indistinguishable from its paramilitary wing,
 UNSO (Ukrainian People's Self-Defense), which does not enjoy legal status. Under
 the law, political parties may be dissolved only by a court decision. The Ministry
 has said that UNA has been deregistered not dissolved, and is free to appeal the
 decision in court.
 Freedom of association is circumscribed by an onerous registration requirement
 that lends itself to abuse and bureaucratic manipulation. Groups must be registered
 with the Government to pursue almost any purpose, whether commercial, political,
 or philanthropic. The Ministries of Justice, Economy, and Foreign Economic Rela-
 tions, and the Councils on Religion and Broadcasting, among others, all have reg-
 istration functions which they have used at one time or another to prevent citizens
 from exercising their right of free association for purposes of which the Government
 does not approve.
 Not being registered has several important disadvantages, for example, unregis-
 tered groups are prohibited from having bank accounts, acquiring property, or enter-
 ing into contracts. Furthermore, the registration law gives the G-overnment an un-
 limited right to inspect the activities of all registered groups. According to this law,
 a registered group must: (1) keep the Government apprised of all its activities, in-
 cluding notification of any meetings; (2) make its meetings open to all persons at
 all times, regardless of whether or not they are members; and (3) upon request,
 present its registration documents to any government official, including the prosecu-
 tor's office, and be ready to prove that it is in compliance with the purposes of the
 group as set out in its registration documents. A change in a group's purposes neces-
 sitates reregistration. A registered group may not duplicate any function or service
 that the Government is supposed to provide. For example, human rights lawyers
 who wish to represent prisoners are prohibited from establishing an association to
 do so, according to the Ministry of Justice, because the Government is supposed to
 provide lawyers for the accused.
 In addition, the registration law has been used to prevent the issuance of visas
 to foreign missionaries (see Section 2.c.). Some human rights groups, despite having
 requested and been denied registration, nevertheless operate, but always with the
 risk of being prosecuted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no official state religion. The 1991 Law on Free-
 dom of Conscience and Religion provides for the separation of church and state and
 permits religious organizations to establish places of worship and train clergy. Reli-
 gious organizations are required to register with local authorities and with the Gov-
 ernments Council for Religious Affairs, a process that generally lasts about 1
 month. The State has not interfered with the registration of minority religions re-
 quested by Ukrainian citizens.
 The ongoing dispute among three competing churches claiming the mantle
 "Ukrainian Orthodox Church" was aggravated in July because of a controversy over
 where to bury the deceased patriarch of one of the churches, the Ukrainian Ortho-
 dox Church, Kiev Patriarchy. Following the patriarch's funeral, police attacked some
 mourners after an attempt was made to inter the patriarch in the pavement outside
 St. Sophia's Cathedral, a state-owned museum contested among the three Orthodox
 churches. The Kiev Patriarchy accused the Government of favoring the rival Moscow
 Patriarchy, while the Government accused the Kiev Patriarchy of inviting participa-
 tion in the funeral by UNA-UNSO activists in paramilitary uniforms. Initial reports
 indicated that UNA-UNSO members threw rocks and paving stones at the police in
 
 
 1090
 
 front of St. Sophia's, but it was clear (as President Kuchma himself stated) that the
 police used excessive and unjustified force to disperse the gathering. Subsequently,
 President Kuchma reaffirmed Ukraine's commitment to religious tolerance, pro-
 claimed the state's neutrality in interconfessional disputes (which center largely on
 property and politics, not canonical differences) and called on all sides to settle their
 disagreements in a civilized fashion.
 An amendment of the 1991 law, passed by the Rada on December 23, 1993, has
 been used to restrict the activities of normative religious organizations. It requires
 that members of the clergy, religious preachers, teachers, other representatives of
 foreign organizations who are foreign citizens and come to visit temporarily in
 Ukraine may preach religious doctrines, administer religious ordinances, or practice
 other canonical activities "only in those religious organizations which invited them
 to Ukraine and with official approval of the governmental body that registered the
 statutes and the articles of the pertinent religous organization.
 Citing a desire to preserve Ukrainian culture, some government officials have ar-
 gued that restrictions on the activities of foreign religious organizations are appro-
 priate. In late 1994, the Government disbanded the Council on Religious Affairs,
 which had been frequently cited as obstructionist, and transferred its functions to
 the Ministry for Nationalities, Migration and Religious Denominations. Nonetheless,
 the treatment of foreign-based religious organizations still appears to be negatively
 prejudiced. Local governments, including in the capital city of Kiev, have set up bu-
 reaucratic roadblocks to the issuance of visas to non-Ukrainian Mormon mission-
 aries wishing to proselytize in Ukraine. City officials also prevented Seventh-Day
 Adventists from holding a convention for their coreligionists. Many suspect that the
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church exerts influence on government behavior towards for-
 eign religious organizations.
 On December 14, a Kiev court sentenced the leaders of the "White Brotherhood"
 religious cult to 7 years in prison for their involvement in the 1993 occupation of
 St. Sophia's cathedral in Kiev (see 1993 report). Among the charges they were con-
 victed of was "practice of a nonregistered religion".
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 Datriation.-Freedom of movement within the country is not restricted by law, but
 !he requirements to register at the workplace and place of residence determine eligi-
 bility for social benefits. People who move to other regions for work in the private
 economy, for instance, may not be eligible for registration and therefore may be de-
 nied formal access to free medical care and other services guaranteed by the State.
 While Ukraine continues to assure the right of return for all those it considers
 citizens, in practice this assurance does not include the right of return for all
 Ukrainian "nationals." The ambiguity of Ukraine's citizenship law regarding the ac-
 quisition of Ukrainian citizenship allows authorities to exclude undesirable nation-
 als froip repatriation. Persons born in Ukraine and living in Ukraine at the time
 of independence are considered citizens. Dual citizenship is not recognized.
 Ukrafnians who wish to travel abroad are able to do so freely. Exit visas are not
 required. On rare occasions, the Government may deny passports to individuals
 with access to state secrets, but a denial can be appealed. However, the Government
 has not supported a foreign-funded program to facilitate the travel of some emi-
 grants who qualify for resettlement abroad as refugees.
 During the first years of independence, the Government supported an extensive
 assistance program for the resettlement of returnees. It provided resources for the
 return not only of Ukrainians living in Russia and elsewhere but also of Tatars to
 Crimea and of Volga Germans to southern Ukraine. By the end of 1995, some
 260,000 Crimean Tatars had returned from exile to the peninsula, mainly from
 Central Asia. The Crimean Tatar leadership has complained that their community
 has not received adequate assistance in resettling and that an onerous process of
 acquiring citizenship has excluded many Crimean Tatars from participating in elec-
 tions and from the right to take part in privatization of land and state assets (see
 Section 5).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 This right was exercised in 1994, when citizens elected a new President, Leoid
 Kuchma, over the incumbent, Leonid Kravchuk, and elected a new Parliament rep-
 resenting a wide range of parties and ideologies. Because the current election law
 requires a minimum of 50 percent voter turnout for elections to be valid, following
 the December 10 elections, 28 seats out of 450 remained unfilled. A new election
 law now under consideration would relax this requirement for the next parliamen-
 tary elections, currently scheduled for 1998.
 
 
 1091
 
 The President, elected for a 4-year term, nominates the Prime Minister and mem-
 bers of the Cabinet. Day-to-day government operations are the responsibility of the
 Prime Minister and the Cabinet of Ministers.
 Women are well represented in politics and at the levels of local and oblast gov-
 ernments. However, they are less well represented at the higher levels of govern-
 ment. There were 16 women in Parliament at year's end although some seats had
 not been filled yet. One woman has cabinet rank. The provincial governors are all
 men.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed local and international human rights groups to operate
 freely although some groups have been denied formal government registration, mak-
 ing it harder for them to obtain accreditation to official events and more difficult
 to register bank accounts and other financial aspects of their organization. The
 Union of Councils for Soviet Jewry, for example, has an active office in Kiev, staffed
 with local human rights monitors. The Government also welcomed visits by foreign
 human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other
 grounds. The Government has not taken steps to effectively enforce prohibitions on
 discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other grounds. The Lviv newspaper For
 a Free Ukraine routinely publishes anti-Semitic diatribes but has not been pros- -
 ecuted under the law forbidding the sowing of interethnic hatred. Prosecutions for
 sexual harassment or discrimination are unheard of. Human rights experts also
 note that the authorities frequent harassment of dark-skinned young men is based
 on stereotypes that people from the Caucusus are involved in criminal activity.
 Women.-While comprehensive information measuring the extent of violence
 against women is not readily available, survey results suggest the problem is perva-
 sive. A poll of 600 women conducted by a women's organization in Kharkiv indicated
 that 10 to 15 percent had been raped and over 25 percent subjected to physical
 abuse over the course of their lifetimes.
 Separate statistics on prosecutions for wife beating or on average sentences are
 not available. When violence occurs, government officials have acknowledged the au-
 thorities often exert pressure on women to drop charges against their husbands to
 preserve the family. The low official incidence of reported crimes against women is
 mirrored by the lack of media attention to the subject and the low priority that most
 women's groups place on the issue.
 Labor law provides for equal rights for men and women, including equal gay for
 equal work, a principle that is generally followed. However, women are muc more
 likely to be laid off than men, and it is estimated that women represent 90 percent
 of all new unemployment. Moreover, a glass ceiling has prevented women from at-
 taining top managerial positions in government, state and private industry. Many
 women, however are taking advantage of the gwing opportunities in the private
 sector to establish small businesses. Educational opportunities for women have gen-
 erally been equal to those enjoyed by men and they remain so.
 Children.-The Government is publicly commtted to the defense of children's
 rights. Because of the deepening economic crisis, however, it has taken few specific
 steps to further a children s rights agenda. There is no pattern of familial or societal
 abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination based on disability,
 but, especially with the economic crisis, the Government has no programs targeted
 at increasing opportunities for the disabled. The law requires public facilities for the
 disabled, but implementation is poor.
 Religious Minorities.-Jews, the second largest minority in the country, have ex-
 panded opportunities to pursue their religious and cultural activities, but anti-Se-
 mitic incidents continue to occur. The national Government has protected the rights
 of the Jewish communit7y and speaks out against anti-Semitism. However, non-
 governmental manifestations of anti-Semitism continue, exemplified by the growth
 of UNA/UNSO, an ultra-nationalist extremist group which in March organized a
 rally in Lviv protesting the activities of the "Jewish mafia." A threatening letter in
 the name of UNSO was later sent to Lviv Jews warning them to quit Ukraine or
 face violent reprisals. Anti-Semitic articles continue to appear in some local news-
 apers, especially in western Ukraine and Kharkiv. Jewish cemeteries have been
 desecrated. After refusing for several years, the Lviv Oblast authorities granted a
 request by the local Jewish community to erect a monument at the site of a World
 
 
 1092
 War 11 German concentration camp. The Government made a major effort to ensure
 that pilgrims of the Bratslav Hasidic Jewish sect were able to visit the tomb of their
 founding rabbi in the city of Uman on the occasion of the Jewish new year.
 National lRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-With some important exceptions, there are
 only isolated cases of ethnic discrimination in Ukraine. The 1991 Law on National
 Minorities played an instrumental role in preventing ethnic strife by allowing indi-
 vidual citizens to use their respective national languages in conducting personal
 business and by allowing minority groups to establish their own schools. Russian
 speakers, who predominate in eastern Ukraine, complained about the increased use
 of Ukrainian in schools and in the media. They claimed that their children are dis-
 advantaged when taking academic entrance examinations since all applicants are
 required to take a Ukrainian-language test. Many regional councils in eastern
 Ukraine have conferred "official" status on the Russian language, although Ukrain-
 ian remains the sole state language according to national legislation.
 There is no evidence of serious ethnic tension, with the exception of two areas.
 In some parts of western Ukraine, the small Russian minority and Jewish groups
 credibly accuse some local Ukrainian ultranationalists of fostering ethnic hatred and
 _printing anti-Semitic tracts. They also charge that local authorities in western
 Ukraine have not taken action against those who foment ethnic hatred. In Crimea,
 the Ukrainian and Tatar minorities credibly complain of discrimination by the Rus-
 sian majority and are demanding that Ukrainian and the Crimean Tatar language
 be given equal treatment to Russian. Interethnic tension in Crimea, aggravated by
 pervasive organized crime problems, erupted into violence in June, leaving four Ta-
 tars dead. The Crimean Government, pleading insufficient funds, has refused re-
 quests from the Tatar community to assist them in reestablishing their cultural her-
 itage through Tatar-language publications and educational institutions. The central
 Government is working with OSCE on these issues.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Soviet law, or pertinent parts of the Constitution,
 continue to regulate the activities of trade unions. The 1992 law on citizens' organi-
 zations (which includes trade unions) stipulates noninterference by public authori-
 ties in the activities of these organizations, which have the right to establish and
 join federations and to affiliate with international organizations on a voluntary
 basis. In principle, all workers and civil servants (including members of te armed
 forces) are free to form unions. In practice, the Government discourages certain cat-
 egories of workers (e.g., nuclear power plant employees) from doing so.
 The successor to the Soviet trade unions, nown as the Federation of Trade
 Unions (FPU), has begun to work independently of the Government and has been
 vocal in opposing draft legislation that would restrict the right to strike. As during
 the Soviet era, most FPU affiliates follow management's instructions. Enterprise
 managers are free to join the FPU. The FPU has no official or legal relationship
 with any political party.
 Independent unions now provide an alternative to the official unions in most sec-
 tors of the economy. Some, such as the Independent Miners' Union of Ukraine
 (NPHU), and unions representing pilots, civil air traffic controllers, locomotive engi-
 neers, and aviation ground crews have formed an umbrella organization, the Free
 Trade Unions of Ukraine (VPU). Other federations of independent unions are also
 being created.
 The Law on Labor Conflict Resolution guarantees the right to strike to all but
 members of the armed forces, civil, and security services, and employees of "continu-
 ing process plants" (e.g., metallurgical factories). The law prohibits strikes that
 "may infringe on the basic needs of the population" (e.g., rail and air transpor-
 tation). Strikes based on political demands are also illegal. The Government has re-
 lied on the courts to deal with strikes it considers illegal, and the courts have not
 always ruled in favor of the Government.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies; the NPHU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law on enterprises states
 that joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues concerning wages,
 working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the enterprise
 level, a system that is not clearly defined. Overlapping spheres of responsibility fre-
 quently impede the collective bargaining process. The Government, in ageement
 with trade unions, establishes wages in each industrial sector and invites all unions
 to participate in the negotiations. The law on labor conflict resolution set up another
 entity, the National Mediation and Reconciliation Service, to mitigate labor-manage-
 
 
 1093
 ment disputes that cannot be resolved at the enterprise level. The President ap-
 points the head of this service. It has not been active in the past year.
 The manner in which the collective bargaining law is alied prejudices the bar-
 gaining process against the independent trade unions and favors the official unions
 affiliates of the FPU). It provides for dues to be taken from the pay of every worker
 in a collective enterprise and paid to the official union. The union, on behalf of the
 enterprise, administers the social welfare benefits (including huge pension benefit
 funds) of workers paid by an enterprise.
 Most workers are never informed that they are not obligated to join the official
 union. Renouncing membership in the official union and joining an independent
 union can be bureaucratically onerous and is typically discouraged by management.
 The collective bargaining law prohibits antiunion discrimination. Disputes under the
 law are supposed to be resolved by the courts. There have been cases in which such
 dis putes have not been resolved in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones.
 C. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 17. In certain nonhazardous industries, however enterprises may negotiate with the
 Government to hire employees between 14 and 17 years of age, with the consent
 of one parent. School attendance is compulsory to the age of 15, a regulation vigor-
 ously enforced by the Ministry of Education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In 1992 the Government established a national
 minimum wage which, along with pensions and other benefits, is supposed to be in-
 dexed to inflation. In reality the minimum wage has not been changed and remains
 at $.30 per month (60,000 coupons) although no employee actually earns wages that
 low. The official poverty line is now $27 per month (4.1 million coupons) and it is
 estimated that some 50 percent of the population now lives in poverty. Inflation was
 reduced significantly to an annual rate of about 170 percent (down from around 500
 percent in 1994).
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, a 24-hour day of rest
 per week, and at least 15 days of paid vacation per year. Stagnation in some indus-
 tries (e.g., defense) significantly reduced the workweek for some categories of work-
 ers.
 The Constitution and other laws contain occupational safety and health stand-
 ards, but these are frequently ignored in practice. Lax safety standards caused
 many serious mine accidents, resulting in 358 deaths in 1994. The Labor Ministry
 is currently rewriting the Mine Safety Law, and the independent unions frequently
 agitate for tighter enforcement of safety laws. In theory, workers have the legal
 right to remove themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing
 continued employment. In reality, however, independent trade unionists report that
 asserting this right would result in retaliation or perhaps dismissal by management.
