 UKRAINE
 Ukraine in 1994 continued to be governed by the 1978 Constitution of the Ukrain-
 ian Soviet Socialist Republic, modified by the introduction of a presidency and a
 multiparty system. In presidential elections held in June and July, Leonid Kuchma
 defeated incumbent Leonid Kravchuk and four other candidates. The first post-So-
 viet elections for the 450-member Rada (parliament), held in the spring, resulted in
 a much fragmented legislature.
 Since independence, a Rada commission has worked unsuccessfully to draft a new
 constitution. In 1994 the President and the Rada proposed forming a new constitu-
 tional commission, which was finally established in October. In general, however,
 1994, like 1992 and 1993, was a year of governmental deadlock.
 The Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the
 Ministry of Defense all have equal status and report to the President through the
 Cabinet. The chairmen of these institutions sit on the Council of Ministers and si-
 multaneously chair the Council's executive committees responsible for each of their
 ministries. The Rada must confirm the appointment of each chairman. The armed
 forces have remained largely outside of politics. President Kuchma nominated, and
 the Rada confirmed on October 3, Ukraine's first civilian Defense Minister. During
 parliamentary debates, the SBU serves in a technical advisory capacity. Although
 it has affected the political process through criminal investigations against certain
 politicians and influential businessmen, human rights organizations have not re-
 ported any violations of human  ts b the SBU.
 The economy continues to be depen ent on state-owned industry and state and
 collectivized agriculture. Little privatization has occurred. The Government has
 struggled to find a unique "Ukrainian way" of transition from a command to a free
 mar et economy. Consequently, economic reform has not been extensively enacted,
 and the economy has suffered double-digit declines in gross domestic product, peri-
 odic hyperinflation, and high levels of hidden unemployment. Much economic activ-
 ity is submerged into the illegal sector (estimated at between 50 and 80 percent),
 causing a concomitant dramatic rise in crime.
 The most significant human rights achievement was the ability of the people of
 Ukraine, through internationally monitored elections, to replace elected and ap-
 
 
 1017
 pointed officials at all levels of the executive and legislative branches in both the
 central and local governments. President Kuchma and the Chairman of the Rada
 acted to strengthen the separation of church and state through public statements
 and through adjustment of certain administrative procedures. The President also
 disciplined-the National Council for Broadcasting, which engaged in partisan and
 illegal actions during the presidential election campaign, and replacedthe director
 of state television, wnich in the past had been accused of restricting public discus-
 sion of important issues. Continuing human rights problems include restrictions on
 freedom of the pess and association, unreformed legal and prison systems, and eth-
 nic tensions in Crimea.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by agents of the Government, but the line between politically motivated kill-
 ing and criminal activities has become difficult to distinguish. The Government's in-
 ability to stem the economic decline and check the growth of violent, organized
 criminal activity had major repercussions. Politicians increasingly became the vic-
 tims-whether through kidnapings or killings-of organized criminal groups, aided
 sometimes, either actively or passively, by corrupt officials. Politicians were particu-
 larly targeted because of their influence over state-owned enterprises, which still
 constituted 95 percent of official economic output.
 In a particularly violent example of lawlessness, the entire leadership of the Cri-
 mean Christian Liberal Party was singled out for assassination because of the Par-
 ty's platform on economic reform. Six people, half of the leadership, were murdered,
 with the remainder fleeing Ukraine. Its remaining members disbanded the Party.
 Crimean authorities were seemingly able neither to stop the killings nor apprehend
 the perpetrators. President Kuchn's first act as Prsident was to sign a decree es-
 tablishing special units and procedures to ombat organized crime. He also acted to
 raise the pay of law enforcement officials to reduce the temptation of corruption.
 b. Disappearance.-   kaylo Boychyshyn a prominent leader of the Popular
 Movement of Ukraine (Rukh) disappeared in January without explanation. No other
 disappearances are known to have occurred.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture. However, police and prison beatings occur with
 regularity, and there is no effective mechanism for registering complaints about mis-
 treatment or for obtaining redress. The Government made no known efforts during
 the year to end the practice or to punish officials who committed such abuses.
 Visitors to prisons describe conditions as severely substandard. Prisons are over-
 crowded, with  the number of prisoners sometimes four times the prison capacity.
 The most crowded tend to be those for prisoners who have been charged with a
 crime and are awaiting trial or are in investigative detention.
 The psychiatric community has adapted more humane methods of treatment.
 Human rights monitors say that, although the quality of medical care in Ukraine
 is generalFy deteriorating, psychiatry is making sig cant rogress. There is some
 official support for the adoption of less coercive and degrading modes of treatment.
 Despite the resource constraints imposed by the economic crisis, efforts to improve
 medical training, hospital conditions, patients' rights, and legal norms are under
 wa-Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reported cases of arbitrary
 arrest or detention of persons. Ukraine has only slightly amended its Soviet-era law
 on detentions, and the recent decree signed by President Kuchma on combating or-
 ganized crime and corruption contains a number of controversial provisions.
 Ukrainian law provides that police authorities may detain a person suspected of
 a crime for 3 days without a warrant. A prosecutor must issue an arrest order if
 the period of detention exceeds 3 days. The maximum period of detention after
 charges have been filed is 12 years. The law permits citizens to appeal the legality
 of an arrest either to the court or to the prosecutor. As citizens gain a better under-
 standing of their rights under a 1992 law, they are increasingly filing appeals with
 the courts. The authorities have dismissed some prosecutors for not adering to
 legal guidelines.
 Apresidential decree designed to combat corruption and organized crime permits
 the preventive" detention of persons for up to 30 days without the filing of charges.
 The President told law enforcement agencies on several occasions that they should
 take no actions inconsistent with other laws and the Constitution, regardless of the
 provisions of the decree. At year's end, it remained to be seen whether the new de-
 cree would result in arbitrary detention or other abuses.
 
 
 1018
 By law, a judge must initiate a trial within 3 weeks from the time charges are
 filed. But t   limt is not always met by the overloaded court system, where months
 may pass before a defendant is finally brought to court. By law, detainees are per-
 mitted access to a defense attorney, who is provided without charge to the indigent,
 from the moment of detention or the filing of charges, whichever comes first. There
 is no attorney-client privilege. The prisoner may talk to a lawyer only in the pres-
 ence of the person who made the arrest. To protect the defendant, each investigative
 file must contain a document signed by the efendant and his counsel attesting that
 the defendant's rights were explained to him in the presence of an attorney. An ap-
 peals court may dismiss a conviction or order a new trial if this document is miss-
 ing. As defendants became aware of their rights, they increasingly insisted on ob-
 servance of these rights. However, many still were not aware, and hence did not
 take advantage, of these procedures. Defense attorneys! fees also were prohibitively
 expensive for many defendants.
 Exile as a punishment no longer exists in Ukrainian law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TiaU.-The criminal justice system follows the former So-
 viet model. Several modifications have been made, including a December 1991 law
 modifying the system of prosecution and a June 1992 law, not yet implemented, au-
 thorizing the creation of a constitutional court. Without further major structural re-
 forms, however, the independence of the judiciary from outside pressure cannot be
 realized.
 The nonimplementation of the constitutional court law is symptomatic of the
 gridlock which stymies judicial reform in general. While the law was enacted, all
 but one of the candidates selected by the G-overnment for the constitutional court
 refused appointments, and the court was not able to begin work. As the number of
 contradictions between new laws and the old Constitution increased, the need for
 a functioning constitutional court became ever more urgent. The Supreme Court has
 refrained from interpreting the laws and the Constitution, leaving individuals busi-
 nesses, and even the Government without a court of appeal in cases in which new
 laws conflict with the Constitution.
 The courts of general jurisdiction are undifferentiated as to function (although
 separate arbitration, or commercial, courts exist). In the same day, judges may hear
 criminal, civil, and juvenile cases. The courts are organized on three levels: rayon
 courts (district, also known as people's courts); oblast (regional) courts; and the Su-
 preme Court. All may act as the court of first instance depending on the nature and
 seriousness of the crime. A case heard in the first instance by the Supreme Court,
 therefore, may not be appealed or reviewed. There are no clear rules to determine
 which court first hears a case. As a rule, military tribunals handle cases involving
 military personnel only.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are organized into offices at the rayon, oblast, and
 republic levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General, ap-
 pointed by the Rada. Prosecutors and defense attorneys by law have equal status
 before the courts. In practice, prosecutors still are very influential because court
 proceedings are not conducted in an adversarial manner. The prosecutor directs all
 investigations of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the SBU, or he may use the
 investigative resources of his office.
 While the defendant is presumed innocent and is tried before a panel consisting
 of one judge and two lay assessors, conviction rates have not changed from the So-
 viet era. Nearly 99 percent of completed cases result in convictions. Judges fre-
 quently send cases unlikely to end in convictions back to the prosecutor for "addi-
 tional investigation." Such cases may then be dropped or closed, occasionally with-
 out informing the court or the defendant. Consequently, conviction rates are a some-
 what misleading statistic. There are no known political prisoners.
 Oblast and Supreme Court judges may not be members of political parties and
 must have at least 5 years of legal experience. The Rada selects judges on the basis
 of recommendations from the Ministry of Justice, based in part on examination re-
 sults. The Prosecutor General and his deputy are nominated by the President and
 confirmed by the Rada. Regional and district prosecutors are appointed by the Pros-
 ecutor General. Many current judges and prosecutors were appointed in Soviet
 times when political influence pervaded the criminal justice system. It is unclear
 how free the judiciary is from influence and intimidation by the executive branch
 of government. Particularly at the regional level, judges, prosecutors, and other
 court officials appear to remain closely attuned to local government interests. Orga-
 nized crime elements have also influenced court decisions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.--Search
 warrants issued by prosecutors, not judges, are required and utilized in most cases.
 The SBU may, however, conduct intrusive surveillance and searches without a war-
 rant on national security grounds. Human rights observers report receiving no coin-
 
 
 1019
 plaints of invasion of privacy by the SBU. According to the SBU charter, persons
 subject to surveillance must be informed after a month's time. The Prosecutor Gen-
 eral's office has oversight responsibility over the SBU, but the extent to which it
 utilizes that authority to monitor SBU activities and to curb excesses by security
 officials is unknown.
 The remnants of Soviet control mechanisms survive in many guises. The militia
 stops vehicles arbitrarily in cities, at the borders of cities and towns, and throughout
 the countryside. It needs no probable cause to stop vehicles for an extensive docu-
 ment check and inspection of all parts of the vehicle and its contents. This has be-
 come a great source of and inducement to corruption in the militia: citizens who
 often have committed no violation, or only a minor one, prefer to pay a bribe to
 avoid time-consuming inspections. Westerners and Western vehicles are popular tar-
 gets of this treatment. Persons who have committed serious violations also escape
 justice by paying bribes to officials, further undermining the concept of the rule of
 law.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A 1991 law protects freedom of speech and the
 print media. Criticism of the Government is tolerated. Because most of the media
 are state owned and supported, there is a general tendency to self-censorship.
 Former President Kravchuk declared that newsprint was a strategic commodity and
 that there would be no privatization of the sources of paper. Government control of
 subsidies, most printing presses, newsprint, and a galaxy of "official" media contin-
 ued to inhibit the growth of a fully free, competitive, and open press. More recently,
 President Kuchma signed a law exempting government-owned media from paying
 high.value-added taxes, thereby making the private press comparatively more ex-
 pensive.
 A 1994 law (predating President Kuchma's election) regulates the electronic
 media. Holos Ukrainy, the official newspaper of the Ukrainian Parliament, accused
 the state television of promoting the reelection of President Kravchuk (see Section
 3) and of restricting discussion of controversial domestic topics, such as disputes
 among the rival Orthodox churches claiming jurisdiction over the country (see Sec-
 tion 2.c.). Several private television channels rebroadcast uncensored foreign news
 programs and create their own programming. Foreign broadcasts (mostly Russian)
 are received without interference.
 After his election, President Kuchma disbanded the Council on Broadcast Media,
 a regulatory agency, on the grounds that his predecessor had improperly appointed
 the Council. In addition, after a private television station, Hravis, broadcast cam-
 paign information about Kuchma and the other candidates in the presidential race,
 the Council had shut it down for being improperly licensed. Upon his election,
 Kuchma reinstated Hravis' license and appointed its executive director to the post
 of deputy director of the State Broadcasting Company. The President's adviser on
 press freedoms stated that Kuchma will reestablish the Council as a nonpartisan
 body solely involved in the technical aspects of broadcast regulation.
 During former President Kravchuk's tenure, the Government created a committee
 with broadly defined powers over all media (i.e., print, broadcasting, and publishing)
 to protect "state secrets.* These were broadly defined to include economic and nu-
 merous other categories of information with the apparent purpose of suppressing
 embarrassing information about the Government's performance. The law establish-
 ing the committee provided not only for censorship of the media but also penalties
 for anyone who published such information. President Kuchma dissolved the com-
 mittee before it was able to exercise its powers.
 The most serious threat to a free and open discussion of issues came from crimi-
 nal elements and organized crime. Some journalists and editors reported they feared
 reprisals from criminal elements if they exposed how organized crime came to con-
 trl much of the economy, both private and state owned. However, as the year
 passed, the print media became more daring and courageous in discussing this sub-
 jedt.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Law on Public Assembly
 of 1989 stipulates that organizations must apply for permission to the respective
 local administration 10 days before a planned demonstration. Participants in dem-
 onstrations are prohibited by law from instigating violence or ethnic coaflict and
 from calling for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. Demonstrations
 may not interfere with traffic, take place near the Rada when it is in session, or
 otherwise hinder public order. In Kiev, officials routinely granted permits. Unli-
 censed demonstrations were common and occurred without police interference, even
 at the Rada when it was in session.
 
 
 1020
 The 1992 law on public organizations prhibits the State from financing political
 parties and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties may
 not receive funds from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. The law pro-
 hibits organizations advocating the violent overthrow of the Government and con-
 stitutional order or undermining Ukraine's state security by collaborating with other
 states. It bars political parties from having administrative or organizational struc-
 tures abroad. The law prohibits police authorities, members of the armed forces, and
 executive branch officials from joining political parties, but many such persons none-
 theless publicly associate themselves with specific parties.
 Political parties may be dissolved only by a court decision. The Supreme Court
 may dissolve a part  or advocating the overthrow of the State, for "anti-Ukrainian"
 activities or for violating or advocating the violation of the constitutional rights of
 citizens. Because no party has been dissolved since independence, the legal criteria
 have not yet been established. Immediately after the coup attempts of 1991, the
 Government banned the Communist Party of Ukraine, which was an affiliate of the
 former Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). Many former members of the
 Communist Party thereafter participated in establishing the Socialist Party of
 Ukraine. In December 1993 the Government registered the Communist Party of
 Ukraine as a new party, and not as a successor party to the CPSU. Hence, former
 CPSU assets were not given to the new Socialist Party, although it continued to
 press the Rada for recognition as the legal successor of the CPSU.
 Freedom of association is circumscribed by an onerous registration requirement
 that lends itself to abuse and bureaucratic manipulation. Groups must be registered
 with the Government to pursue almost any purpose, whether commercial or philan-
 thropic. The Ministries of Justice, Economy, Foreign Economic Relations, and the
 Councils on Religion and Broadcasting, among others, all have registration functions
 which they have used at one time or another to prevent citizens from exercising
 their right of free association for purposes of which the Government does not ap-
 prove.
 Not being registered has several important disadvantages, i.e., unregistered
 grnups are prohibited from having bank accounts acquiring property, or entering
 into contracts. On the other hand, the registration law gives the Government an un-
 limited right to inspect the activities of all registered groups. According to this law,
 a registered group must (1) keep the Government apprised of all its activities, in-
 cluding notification of any meetings; (2) make its meetings open to all persons at
 all times, regardless of whether or not they are members- and (3) upon request,
 present its registration documents to any government official, including the prosecu-
 tor's office, and be ready to prove that it is in compliance with the purposes of the
 group as set out in its registration documents. A change in a groups purposes neces-
 sitates reregistration. A registered &roup may not duplicate any fnction or service
 that the Government already provides. For instance, human rights lawyers who
 wish to represent prisoners are prohibited from establishing an association to do so,
 according to the Ministry of Justice, because the Government already provides law-
 yers for te accused.
 Provisions of the law on registration, through bureaucratic and political maneu-
 vering, were used to vitiate sections of the 1993 election law which governed the
 recent Rada elections. The election law expressly called for the establishment of an
 association of nonpartisan voters to supply nonpartisan information to the voters on
 the democratic process, the candidates, and the parties. Despite such specific provi-
 sions, the Central Election Commission, which is responsible for adminstring the
 election law, refused to register the committee and referred the group to the Min-
 istry of Justice for registry as a civic organization. It was reported that, when con-
 sulted by the Ministry of Justice, the Central Election Commission recommended
 that the Ministry not register the group. The Ministry of Justice, based in part on
 that recommendation, refused to register the committee, citing as one reason that
 it would be against the law for any group of private citizens to arrange for informa-
 tional meetings between candidates and the voters. Without registration, the com-
 mittee was effectively excluded from carrying out the functions explicitly provided
 for by Ukrainian law.
 In addition, the registration law has been used to prevent the issuance of visas
 to foreign missionaries (see Section 2.c.). Some human rights groups, despite having
 requested and been denied reitration, nevertheless operate, but always with the
 risk of being prosecuted. The Odesa prosecutor warned a human rights group that
 was refused registration in Odesa that all members of the group would be arrested
 if they continued to operate.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no official state religion. The 1991 law on free-
 dom of conscience and religion provides for the separation of church and state and
 permits religious organizations to establish places of worship and train clergy. Reli-
 
 
 1021
 gious organizations are required to register with local authorities and with the Gov-
 ernment's Council for Religious Affairs a process that generally lasts about 1
 month. The State has not interfered with the registration of minority religions re-
 quested by Ukrainian citizens. The State has on occasion intervened in disputes
 over church property among the three rival Orthodox churches which claim jurisdic-
 tion over Orthodox Christians in Ukraine. Church disputes practically dropped to
 nil in 1994, and the Government took an even-handed approac in these cases.
 Obstacles to complete religious freedom still exist at the local level where the bu-
 reaucracy in some places has delayed registration of religious organizations. How-
 ever, a religious organization may not be denied registration. Any group represent-
 ing itself as a church may applv for registration.
 An amendment of the 1991 law, passed by the Rada on December 23, 1993, has
 been used to restrict the activities of nonnative religious organizations. It requires
 that "clergymen, religious preachers, teachers, other representatives of foreign orga-
 nizations who are foreign citizens and come to visit temporarily in Ukraine may
 preach religious doctrines, administer religious ordinances, or practice other canoni-
 cal activities only in those religious organizations which invited them to Ukraine
 and with official approval of the governmental body that registered the statutes and
 the articles of the pertinent religious organization.
 Citing a desire to preserve Ukrainian culture, some government officials have ar-
 gued that restrictions on the activities of nonnative religious organizations are ap-
 propriate. The Kiev city administration has not responded thus far to applications
 non-Ukrainian Mormon missionaries and others for visas. Some local authorities
 refused to respond officially to the requests but stated in private that they will not
 grant visas because of the opposition of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. When the
 Mormon church continued to press its case for visas, some members of the Council
 on Religious Affairs threatened to deregister the Mormon church if it did not cease
 its efforts. As one of his first presidential acts, President Kuchma disbanded this
 Council and directed that a new committee be formed under the supervision of the
 Minister for Nationalities, Migration, and Religious Denominations. At year's end,
 it was not yet clear whether this would affect government restrictions on foreign re-
 ligious workers.
 Jews, the second-largest minority in the country, have expanded opportunities to
 pursue their religious and cultural activities, but anti-Semitic incidents continue to
 occur. The national Government has protected the rights of the Jewish community
 and speaks out against anti-Semitism. However, nongovernmental manifestations of
 anti-Semitism continue, exemplified by the growth of an ultranationalist extremist
 group in western Ukraine having anti-Semitism as a tenet. The  a= plied for,
 but was refused, registration as a political party at the national eve.  e city of
 L'viv did permit the group to register, and it may now operate there openly. Anti-
 Semitic articles continue to appear in some local newspapers, especially in western
 Ukraine and Kharkiv, and there have been reports of new anti-Semitic periodicals.
 Jewish cemeteries have been desecrated. In Lviv, the Jewish community asked to
 erect a monument at what is said to be the only former German concentration camp
 in Europe without a memorial L'viv officials refused permission.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement within the country is not restricted by law, but
 the requirements to register at the workplace and place of residence determine eligi-
 bility for social benefits. People who move to other regions for work in the private
 economy, for instance, may not be eligible for registration and therefore may not be
 able to use medical facilities unless they pay very high fees in hard currency.
 Ukraine assures the right of return for all those it considers its citizens. Persons
 born in Ukraine and living in Ukraine at the time of independence are considered
 citizens. The right of return is available to people born in Ukraine who left the
 country prior to independence and did not assume another citizenship. Dual citizen-
 ship is not recognized.
 Before the precipitous decline in its finances in 1994, the Government had an ex-
 tensive assistance program for the resettlement of returnees. It provided resources
 for the return not only of Ukrainians living in Russia and elsewhere but also the
 Tatars to Crimea and the Volga Germans to southern Ukraine. By 1994 250,000
 Tatars had returned to Crimea. In 1994 the Government was no longer able to pro-
 vide assistance, but it did not put any impediments in the way of the Tatars' con-
 tinuing return.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised this right in 1994 elections which resulted in the peaceful
 democratic transfer of power from an incumbent president running for reelection.
 
 
 1022
 
 Elections to the 450-member Rada (parliament) were also held in 1994, and both
 elections were judged to have been generally free and fair.
 Parliamentary elections, which began on March 27, resulted in a fragmented leg-
 islature. While Communists are the largest party, the largest voting bloc is an
 emerging group of parliamentary factions in the center which support democratic
 and economic reform.
 In the presidential election's first round on June 26 among six candidates, Leonid
 Kuchma, former Prime Minister and candidate of the centrist Inter-Regional Reform
 Bloc, obtained about 31 percent of the vote to some 38 percent for Leonid Kravchuk
 running for reelection. Kucbma won the ran-off on July 10 with 52 percent of the
 vote.A   citizens above the age of 18 had the right to vote regardless of nationality,
 religion, or sex, and the election turnout ranged from around 70 percent for the
 presidential election to about 75 percent for the legislative ones.
 Women are well represented in politics and government, especially at the levels
 of local and oblast governments. However, they are less well represented at the
 higher levels of government. There are only 12 women in Parliament and very few
 women in the highest levels of government.
 The President, elected for a 4-year term, nominates the Prime Minister and mem-
 bers of the Cabinet, some of whom must be confirmed by Parliament. Day-to-day
 government operations are the responsibility of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet
 of ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed local and international human rights groups to operate
 freely. The Union of Councils for Soviet Jewry, for example, has an active office in
 Kiev, staffed with local human rights monitors.
 The Government also welcomed visits by foreign human rights organizations. Nu-
 merous international groups were invited to observe the elections.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other
 grounds.
 Women.-Unemployment, lack of medical care, the degree of availability of child
 care and social mobility, most of which have come to the fore or been exacerbated
 b; tie economic crisis, are the primary concerns of women and women's groups in
 !raine. Labor law provides for equal rights for men and women. However, it is
 estimated that women represent 90 percent of all new unemployment and are much
 more likely to be laid off than men. Equal pay for equal work is the law and gen-
 erally appears to be the practice as well. However, women are seldom seen in high-
 level managerial positions. Educational opportunities for women are improving, and
 more women are entering the upper echelons of the legal, medical, and journalism
 professions. Women's groups now are taking advantage of the developing private
 economy to make a place for women and address their economic concerns. In part
 because of their high unemployment, women appear to be seizing the initiative in
 the development of businesses large and small in the emerging private market econ-
 omomen's groups do not cite violence as a primary issue for women. Reports of vio-
 lence against women are few and usually connected with the high incidence of alco-
 holism among men and women. There is a lack of awareness of spouse abuse and
 other violence against women as a women's rights issue.
 Separate statistics on prosecutions for wife beating or on average sentences are
 not available. When violence occurs, government officials have acknowledged the au-
 thorities often exert pressure on women to drop charges against their husbands to
 preserve the family. The low official incidence of crimes against women is mirrored
 y the lack of media attention to the subject and the low priority that women's
 groups place on the issue.
 Children.-The Government is publicly committed to the defense of children's
 rights. Because of the deepening economic crisis, however, it has taken few specific
 steps to further a children s rights agenda. There is no pattern of familial or societal
 abuse of children.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-In spite of vigorous press debate between
 Ukrainian ultranationalists and apprehensive Russian speakers there are only iso-
 lated cases of ethnic discrimination in Ukraine. In one case, Russian speakers in
 L'viv have complained that there is insufficient instruction in the schools in Rus-
 sian. The 1991 law on national minorities played an instrumental role in preventing
 ethnic strife by allowing individual citizens to use their respective national lan-
 
 
 1023
 gages in conducting personal business and by allowing minority groups to establish
 thir own schools.
 There is no evidence of serious ethnic tension, with the exception of two areas.
 In some parts of western Ukraine, the small Russian minority and Jewish groups
 credibly accuse local Ukrainian ultranationalists of fostering ethnic hatred and
 printing anti-Semitic tracts. In Crimea, the Ukrainian and Tatar minorities credibly
 complain of discrimination by the Russian majority. The Crimean government with-
 drew financial support for the only Ukrainian-language newspaper in Simferopol
 and has resisted Tatar requests for support for Tatar-language schools and cultural
 facilities.
 Russian speakers, who predominate in eastern Ukraine, complained about the in-
 creased use of Ukrainian in schools and in the media. They claimed that their chil-
 dren are disadvantaged when taking academic entrance examinations since all ap-
 plicants are required to take a Ukrainian-language test. President Kuchma, himself
 a Russian speaker, took much of the venom out of the language issue by consist-
 ently speaking Ukrainian in public and by pledging during his election campaign
 to request the Rada to give official status to the Russian language.
 Contrary to the situation in 1993, there were no known instances of anti-Roma
 violence in 1994.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination based on disability,
 but, especially with the economic crisis, the Government has no programs targeted
 at increasing opportunities for the disabled. The law requires public facilities for the
 disabled, but implementation is poor.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.--Soviet law, or pertinent parts of the Constitution,
 continue to regulate the activities of trade unions. The 1992 law on citizens' organi-
 zations (which includes trade unions) stipulates noninterference by public authori-
 ties in the activities of these organizations, which have the right to establish and
 join federations and to affiliate with international organizations on a voluntary
 basis. The Rada is debating a new constitution and a new law on trade unions. In
 principle, all workers and civil servants (including members of the armed forces) are
 free to form unions. In practice, the Government discourages certain categories of
 workers (e.g., nuclear power plant employees) from doing so.
 An officially sanctioned successor to the former Soviet trade unions, known as the
 Federation of Trade Unions (FTU), has begun to work independently of the Govern-
 ment and has been vocal in opposing draft legislation that would restrict the right
 to strike. The FTU is considered a artner with management in the running of state
 enterprises. The Government provides this organization with office buildings and re-
 sort properties. The FTU has no official or legal relationship with any political
 party.
 Many independent unions now provide an alternative to the official unions in
 most sectors of the economy. Some, such as the Independent Miners' Union of
 Ukraine (NPGU), and unions representing pilots, civil air dispatchers, locomotive
 engineers, and aviation ground crews formed the Consultative Council of Free Trade
 Unions in 1992. This entity acts independently of the FTU.
 The law on labor conflict resolution guarantees the right to strike to all but mem-
 bers of the armed forces, civil and security services, and employees of 'continuing
 process plants" (e.g., metallurgical factories). The law prohibits strikes that "may in-
 fringe on the basic needs of the population" (e.g., rail and air transportation).
 Strikes based on political demands are also illegal, but this did not prevent miners
 and transportation workers from making political as well as economic demands dur-
 ing their September 1993 strikes that forced the Government to hold elections at
 every level of government in 1994. The Government has relied on the courts to deal
 with strikes that it considers illegal, and the courts have not always ruled in favor
 of the Government.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies; the NPGU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law on enterprises states
 that joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues concerning wages,
 working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the enterprise
 level, a system that is not clearly defined. Overlapping spheres of responsibility fre-
 quently impede the collective bargaining process. The Government, in agreement
 with trade unions, establishes wages in each industrial sector and invites all unions
 to participate in the negotiations. The law on labor conflict resolution set up another
 bureaucracy, the National Mediation and Reconciliation Service, to mitigate labor-
 
 
 1024
 management disputes that cannot be resolved at the enterprise level. The President
 appoints the head of this service.
 Collective bargaining law prejudices the bargaining process against the independ-
 ent trade unions and favors the official unions. It provides for dues to be taken from
 the pay of every worker in a collective and paid to the official union. The union,
 on behalf of the enterprise, administers the social welfare benefits (including huge
 pension benefit funds) of workers paid by an enterprise.
 Most workers are never informed that they are not obligated to join the official
 union, and joining an independent union can be bureaucratically onerous as well.
 Independent unions are not given resources to administer social welfare benefits.
 Enterprise directors discourage departures from the official union by meeting with
 workers to discuss the benefits of official union membership.
 The collective bargaining law prohibits antiunion discrimination. The courts re-
 solve disputes under the law. There have been cases in which such disputes have
 not been resolved in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones in Ukraine.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 17. In certain nonhazardous industries, however, enterprises may negotiate with the
 Government to hire employees between 15 and 17 years of age. Education is compul-
 sory up to age 15. The Ministry of Education vigorously enforces the law on edu-
 cation.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In 1992 the Government established a country-
 wide minimum wage. Monthly inflation rose dramatically all during 1993 and 1994.
 This hyperinflation has seriously eroded incomes, and officially over half the popu-
 lation of Ukraine now lives below the poverty level, with further declines expected.
 In addition, the Government has paid most salaries several months late, further re-
 ducing income. In theory, the law on wages, pensions, and social security provides
 for mechanisms to index the minimum wage to inflation. As of December 1, the min-
 imum wage was approximately $6.50, or nearly 1 million karbovanets per month.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 41-hour workweek, a 24-hour day of rest
 per week, and at least 15 days of paid vacation per year. Stagnation in some indus-
 tries (e.g., defense) significantly reduced the workweek for some categories of work-
 ers.
 The Constitution and other laws contain occupational safety and health stand-
 ards, but these are frequently ignored in practice. Lax safety standards enforcement
 was the principal cause of many serious mine accidents resulting in over 100 deaths
 and more injuries in 1993. In theory, workers have the legal right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing continued employment.
 In reality however, labor experts say that continued employment would be in ques-
 tion. The Labor Ministry is currently rewriting the mine safety law, and the NPGU
 is demanding that the Government improve worker safety in the mines.
