United States
In our World Report 2004, Human Rights Watch noted with alarm in an essay
titled “Above the Law” the Bush administration’s efforts post 9/11 to dramatically
expand executive power at the expense of judicial or legislative protection for
individual rights. It now appears we underestimated the extent and tenacity of
those efforts.
In the past five years the administration has authorized torture and other abusive
interrogation techniques, “disappeared” dozens of suspected terrorists into
secret prisons, twisted domestic law to permit indefinite detention without charge
of persons suspected of links to terrorism, and confined hundreds at
Guantanamo Bay without charge while denying them information about the basis
for their detention and meaningful opportunity to contest it. The administration
has sought to exempt its actions from court oversight.
Wholly outside the counterterrorism arena, the executive branch has continued to
slight its obligation to protect the human rights of US residents, particularly those
who are accused or convicted of crimes, or who are immigrants.
In 2006 the Supreme Court provided an important check on some of the administration’s
counterterrorism policies, striking down the military commissions originally
authorized by President George W. Bush to try Guantanamo detainees and
calling into question the legality of the administration’s secret detention program.
The president, in response, asked Congress to authorize a system of military commissions
akin to those that had been struck down, and to redefine the humane
treatment requirements of the Geneva Conventions so that the CIA’s
“enhanced”—and abusive—interrogation program could continue. The legislation
Congress ultimately passed did not give the administration everything it wanted.
Congress left intact the humane treatment requirements and insisted abusive
interrogation techniques such as waterboarding (mock drowning), induced
hypothermia, and extended sleep deprivation remain prosecutable war crimes.
But the legislation also endorsed deeply troubling provisions that violate international
human rights protections. These include provisions that curtail the fundamental
right of non-citizens to contest their detention and define “combatant” in a way that allows for the military detention and trial of civilians who did not participate
in armed hostilities.
The United States appeared in 2006 before the United Nations Committee against
Torture and Human Rights Committee regarding its compliance with the
Convention against Torture and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. With regard to US counterterrorism policies, both committee of experts
rejected most of the administration’s justifications, issuing strong and thorough
critiques of the US record on torture, detention without charge, and lack of
accountability for abuse. The Human Rights Committee also issued a robust critique
of US criminal justice, detention, and immigration policies, including the
practice of sentencing juveniles to life without parole and the overbroad “material
support to terrorism” bars on admission that put asylum seekers at risk of being
returned to countries where they fear persecution.
Guantanamo Bay, Indefinite Detention, and Military
Commissions
Approximately 450 men remain in long-term, indefinite, and largely incommunicado
detention at Guantanamo Bay. The United States continues to assert its
authority to hold these men as “unlawful enemy combatants” without charge and
without regard to the laws of armed conflict.
In late 2005 Congress passed a law preventing non-citizen Guantanamo
detainees from bringing any future court challenges to their detention, their treatment
by US officials, or their confinement conditions. In September 2006
Congress extended and made these provisions retroactive—applying them to
pending cases and to non-citizens in US custody anywhere in the world. Unless
found unconstitutional, this measure could result in courts dismissing the more
than 200 pending habeas corpus cases brought on behalf of Guantanamo
detainees, as well as the pending habeas challenge brought by Ali Saleh Kahleh
al-Marri, the only so-called unlawful enemy combatant still detained in the United
States, and a handful of habeas cases brought on behalf of detainees in
Afghanistan.
In response to litigation brought by the Associated Press, the US publicly disclosed
in early 2006 the names of the Guantanamo detainees and transcripts of
administrative proceedings regarding their continued detention. These documents
suggest that, contrary to the claims of the Bush administration, only a
small proportion of the detainees are alleged to have engaged in armed conflict
against the United States.
The Department of Defense has been working through a second round of administrative
reviews to determine whether individual Guantanamo detainees are still
a “threat” or of intelligence value that warrants their continued detention. At this
writing, the military Administrative Review Boards have slated 166 detainees for
transfer or release, although fewer than a third have actually left Guantanamo.
Some countries have refused to take back nationals declared “enemy combatants”
by the US or to accept US requirements for their monitoring or continued
detention. In other cases, detainees had substantial grounds for believing they
might be tortured if returned. Rather than allowing some of these detainees into
the United States—including men who have been cleared of any wrongdoing—the
Bush administration continues to hold them in Guantanamo.
Alleged “enemy combatant” Ali Saleh Kahleh al-Marri remains in custody in the
United States. A Qatari who had been living in the US on a student visa, he was
charged in 2002 with credit card fraud, but just weeks before his trial the US
administration declared him an “enemy combatant,” and sent him to a military
brig in South Carolina, where he has been held in solitary confinement for three
years, essentially incommunicado; his only contact is with his lawyers, who had
to sue in US court for access to him. The charges against al-Marri are based on a
single hearsay declaration relying heavily on accusations by a man widely reported
to have been tortured in a secret Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)-run detention
center. The government has filed to dismiss al-Marri’s habeas challenge to
the lawfulness of his detention—citing the court-stripping provisions in the
Military Commissions Act. As of this writing, the court had not ruled on the government’s
request.
In June 2006 the US Supreme Court, in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, struck down the military
commissions set up to try non-citizens accused of participating in or supporting
terrorist acts against the United States. In response to Hamdan, in September Congress legislated a new system of military commissions (the
Military Commissions Act of 2006). The new commissions contain important
improvements over the previous ones. For example, Congress has specified that
the accused have access to the same evidence as is considered by the fact-finder,
and that they may appeal convictions to a civilian appellate court (though such
review is limited to legal findings, not factual ones, so actual innocence would
not be a basis for overturning a verdict). But the new rules still contain troubling
provisions: for example, statements obtained through “cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment” prior to December 30, 2005, are admissible so long as a judge
finds they have probative value and are “reliable” (a contradiction in terms).
Perhaps the most disturbing aspect of these new commissions is their expansive
jurisdiction. The commissions are authorized to try any non-US citizen, including
longtime US residents, who falls within a definition of “unlawful enemy combatant”
that is far broader than the definition ordinarily used under the laws of war.
Because the definition includes anyone who “purposefully and materially supported”
hostilities against the United States, it potentially turns ordinary civilians—
such as an individual who sends money to a banned group—into “combatants”
who can be placed in military custody and hauled before a military commission.
At this writing no charges have been brought against detainees under the new
military commission rules, and the first trials were not expected until summer
2007 at the earliest.
Torture Policy
In late 2005 Congress—over the Bush administration’s objections—passed the
Detainee Treatment Act, which prohibits the use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment by any US personnel operating anywhere in the world. The Supreme
Court stepped in here as well, ruling in Hamdan that the US is bound to treat al
Qaeda detainees in accordance with the minimal provisions of the Geneva
Conventions’ Common Article 3.
In response, in July 2006 the Pentagon ordered the military to ensure that all of
its practices complied with these standards, and in September it announced new interrogation rules that repudiated many of the abusive techniques reportedly
used by US interrogators in the past, including waterboarding, painful stress positions,
and prolonged sleep deprivation or exposure to cold. Ironically, that same
day the Bush administration proposed legislation effectively rewriting the
humane treatment standards of Common Article 3, permitting the CIA to continue
using the abusive interrogation techniques now banned by the Pentagon.
Congress rejected the administration’s proposal, but with mixed results. It retains
most of the War Crimes Act, which exposes interrogators to criminal prosecution
for both torture and “cruel and inhuman treatment” (defined as conduct that
causes serious physical or mental pain or suffering). As two of the primary
authors of the legislation, Senators McCain and Warner, have stated that the definition
of prohibited conduct is intended to criminalize a wide range of abusive
interrogation techniques. However, the law narrowed prosecutable offenses
under the War Crimes Act by creating a higher threshold for inflicting serious
physical pain or suffering, preventing prosecution for non-prolonged mental
abuse occurring prior to the new law, and eliminating as a war crime the punishing
of a person after an unfair trial.
Most seriously, the legislation prohibits any detainee the US government has
labeled an “unlawful enemy combatant” from ever challenging in court his treatment
while in US custody, even after his release.
Secret Prisons
In early September 2006 President Bush admitted for the first time that the CIA
had maintained secret detention centers abroad to interrogate terrorism suspects.
He announced that his administration was shutting them down and had
moved the 14 people still being held in those centers to Guantanamo Bay (where
they have since been visited by the International Committee of the Red Cross).
Bush was unrepentant when he announced the existence of the secret prisons,
and his administration kept open the option of restarting the program of enforced
disappearances of terrorist suspects.
The administration has not identified the other people whom it held in the secret
prisons, nor has it disclosed their current whereabouts. Human Rights Watch has identified at least 15 other people we believe were held in those prisons. Those
persons remain “disappeared” under international law until the US can account
for them.
Accountability for Detainee Abuse
Despite a number of official investigations into abuse of detainees in US custody
in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Guantanamo Bay, the United States has done little to
hold those involved accountable. Joint research conducted by New York University
Law School, Human Rights First, and Human Rights Watch documented over 330
cases in which US military and civilian personnel were credibly alleged to have
abused or killed detainees. While these cases involved at least 600 US personnel
and over 460 detainees, only a small percentage have been prosecuted: approximately
90 military personnel, no CIA agents, and one civilian contractor. Only 10
of the convicted abusers were sentenced to a year or more in prison.
The US persisted in thwarting efforts by victims of abuse to seek redress in court.
Asserting claims of “state secrets” and “national security,” the government
moved to dismiss claims brought by Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen who was
seized in Macedonia, transferred to a CIA-run prison in Afghanistan, beaten, and
held incommunicado for several months, and by Maher Arar, a dual Canadian-
Syrian citizen detained by US authorities on his way home to Canada and sent to
Syria, where he was imprisoned for 10 months and tortured. Lower courts dismissed
both cases on the grounds that the court should not second-guess—or
even investigate—the government’s actions. Both Arar and el-Masri have
appealed. A Canadian commission of inquiry into Arar’s case found that the US
deported him to Syria based on Canadian authorities’ erroneous claims that he
was linked to terrorism. The inquiry concluded “categorically” that there was “no
evidence to indicate that Arar has committed any offense.”
The US continues to assert that it may lawfully send detainees to countries that
regularly engage in torture, so long as it has obtained “diplomatic assurances”—
i.e. promises by the receiving government not to mistreat the detainee. But these
promises cannot be enforced and, indeed, there is little incentive for the governments
involved to uncover any breach of the assurances. The US has stated that it
will rely on such assurances in moving detainees from Guantanamo Bay.
Incarceration
With more than 2.2 million men and women in US jails and prisons, a preponderance
of whom are low-level nonviolent offenders, the United States has the highest
incarceration rate in the world. The burden of incarceration falls disproportionately
on the poor and members of racial and ethnic minorities.
Many prisons and jails are dangerous, plagued by high rates of violence and illness,
and devoid of productive programs and activities for prisoners. The private
bipartisan Commission on Safety and Abuse in America’s Prisons released a
report in June 2006 concluding that overcrowding and prisoner idleness promotes
disorder and tension that can escalate into violence. Staff members engage in
unnecessary as well as excessive use of force to respond to minor prisoner misbehavior.
As of the beginning of the year, prison policies in six states permitted use of
aggressive unmuzzled dogs to intimidate and even attack prisoners who did not
obey orders to leave their cells – four of those states used dogs for this purpose.
This practice was virtually secret, even within the corrections community, until
Human Rights Watch revealed it in October. Advocacy by Human Rights Watch
helped persuade three states to change their policies. At this writing, only one
state continues to use dogs to help prison officers remove prisoners from their
cells.
In July 2006 a Department of Justice Bureau of Statistics (BJS) report found that
formal complaints of sexual violence filed in adult prisons and jails increased
nearly 16 percent between 2004 and 2005, from 5,386 to 6,241; more than half
concerned staff sexual misconduct or harassment. As the BJS acknowledges,
these numbers underestimate the level of sexual violence in prison because
inmates are reluctant to make complaints for fear of retaliation, among other reasons.
The National Prison Rape Elimination Commission held four public hearings
this year during which witnesses testified to the causes and consequences of
staff and inmate-on-inmate rape and sexual abuse.
In an investigation of two high-security juvenile facilities for girls in New York
state, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union found that
young girls were subjected to excessive use of a face-down “restraint” procedure in which girls were thrown to the floor, often causing injury, as well as incidents
of sexual abuse, and inadequate educational and mental health services.
Prisons struggle to provide quality medical care without adequate resources or
qualified staff. A federal judge put the entire California prison medical system
under receivership because care was so abysmal that one prisoner died from
medical malpractice or neglect every six to seven days. In Florida, over 300
inmates who have been found mentally incompetent to stand trial had been left
to languish in jail, despite a law requiring the state to move them to hospitals or
other mental health facilities where they can get the treatment they need.
The Death Penalty and Other Cruel Sentences
State and federal governments executed 51 prisoners between January and
November 2006, bringing the total number of men and women executed in the
country to 1055 since 1977. Almost all were killed by lethal injection. Mounting
evidence indicates that contrary to public belief, lethal injection may be a very
painful way to die. Execution logs from six recent executions in California and toxicology
reports from executions in Missouri and North Carolina suggest that some
prisoners may have been conscious and suffering at the time of their executions.
Despite being used for almost 30 years, state lethal injection protocols were
never subjected to scientific, medical, or public scrutiny until recent litigation
prompted some judges and officials to examine them.
In the United States, youth who were below the age of 18 at the time of their
crimes may be tried and sentenced as adults. Courts in the US continue to
impose life sentences without the possibility of parole on many such youthful
offenders. The more than 2,225 youthful offenders serving life without parole are
disproportionately African American or Hispanic. The UN Committee against
Torture, the Human Rights Committee, and the Secretary-General in his study on
violence against children worldwide all rebuked the United States in 2006 for
imposing life without parole sentences on young offenders. On the legislative
front, the Colorado legislature eliminated the sentence, although it substituted a
mandatory term of 40 years’ imprisonment. A package of bills to eliminate the
sentence remained under serious consideration in Michigan.
Immigrants and Other Non-Citizens
The two houses of Congress remained in a stalemate over the correct approach to
immigration reform, with the Senate embracing the concept of a guest worker program,
and the House focusing solely on immigration restrictions and enforcement.
Just before the November 7, 2006 elections, Republican Party leaders in the
House re-introduced previously failed legislation that would allow fencing of 700
miles of the US-Mexico border, give state and local officials the authority to
enforce immigration law while shielding them from accountability for errors, and
reverse two Supreme Court decisions that had found indefinite detention of noncitizens
unconstitutional. None of these measures were considered in committees,
and instead were rushed to a vote and passed by the House, though only
the border fence legislation had passed the Senate and won the approval of
President Bush at this writing.
As of late 2006 hundreds of asylum seekers faced return to their countries of origin
by the United States and thousands of refugees are being denied resettlement
inside the US due to overbroad definitions of terrorism and terrorism-related
activity in the Immigration and Nationality Act. Anyone who associated with, or
provided any “material support” to any armed group is denied asylum, including
civilians caught up in civil wars who are forced at gunpoint to provide food to
rebel forces.
HIV/ AIDS
Massachusetts, Delaware, and New Jersey made progress toward ensuring injection
drug users’ access to sterile syringes, recognizing their human right to obtain
lifesaving HIV/AIDS information and services without fear of punishment.
Massachusetts enacted legislation permitting non-prescription sale of syringes;
Delaware approved its first needle exchange program; and the New Jersey legislature
considered legislation to increase access to clean needles, including by
establishing needle exchange programs.
California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed legislation that would have
permitted condom distribution to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS in state prisons, rejecting the example of jurisdictions in the US and abroad that have taken such
measures to protect inmate health.