United States
The United States has long been proud of its commitment to the rule
of law, its constitutional system of checks and balances, the independence
of its judiciary, and its democratic political culture. The picture has
never been perfect—the legacy of institutionalized discrimination that
followed in slavery’s wake is the most obvious example of flaws—but the
United States has long seen itself to be, and in many places has been
perceived to be, an effective advocate for human rights worldwide and
one that practices much of what it preaches.
Its record at home and overseas in 2004—most notably the government’s
use of coercive interrogation and disregard for the Geneva
Conventions in its treatment of detainees in Afghanistan, Iraq, and
Guantanamo Bay, exemplified by the images of torture from Abu
Ghraib prison—have undermined that reputation. The Bush administration’s
efforts to expand executive power at the expense of judicial and
legislative oversight in its approach to counterterrorism also continue to
jeopardize long-established civil and political rights in the United
States.
A vibrant and diverse group of nongovernmental organizations work in
the United States on a wide range of domestic human rights concerns.
As reflected in the summary below, Human Rights Watch’s work on
domestic U.S. rights practices currently focuses on the human rights
implications of the Bush administration’s counterterrorism measures
and continuing rights violations in the U.S. criminal justice system.
Counterterrorism and Human Rights
The Bush administration still refuses to apply fundamental rights protections
found in U.S. and international law to persons apprehended in
its global campaign against terrorism. It refuses to apply either laws of
war or human rights standards to the more than five hundred men at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who have been held, many since 2002, in longterm
indefinite and largely incommunicado detention; it has begun proceedings
to try terrorist suspects before military commissions that do
not meet fair trial standards; it has sought to block the most basic due
process protections to U.S. citizens detained on presidential order as
enemy combatants; and it has sent or assisted in the return of individuals
to countries where they face torture.
Guantanamo Bay and Enemy Combatant Detentions
Some 550 men remain detained at Guantanamo Bay, many held since
2002, in long-term indefinite and largely incommunicado detention.
The United States had insisted that detained “enemy combatants” had
no right to judicial review of their detention. In June, 2004, however,
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that U.S. courts had jurisdiction to hear
cases by the Guantanamo detainees and that those held by the United
States must be afforded a meaningful opportunity to contest their
detention before a neutral decision maker.
In response to the Supreme Court rulings, the Pentagon quickly instituted
Combatant Status Review Tribunals (CSRTs) to assess whether
each Guantanamo detainee is an enemy combatant. This one-time
administrative review has no basis in U.S. or international law, and is
being used by the administration to justify the detention of persons
who, absent evidence of criminal wrongdoing or violation of the laws of
war, should have been released at the conclusion of active hostilities
between the United States and the Taliban government in 2002.
Detainees who have sought to contest their status before the CSRTs
have not been able to bring in outside witnesses (other than other
Guantanamo detainees) or be represented by counsel, and the process
does not guarantee that they can see all of the evidence against them. As
of late November 2004, CRSTs had reviewed 401 cases; final action was
announced in 144 cases and only one detainee was deemed to be a nonenemy
combatant and released.
During 2004, former Guantanamo detainees (some 150 have been
released since the first prisoners were brought from Afghanistan in
January 2002) alleged that interrogation methods included prolonged
periods of painful “stress” positions, exposure to extreme cold and loud
music, and threats of torture and death. They said they had been subjected
to weeks and even months in solitary confinement—at times
either suffocatingly hot or cold from excessive air conditioning—as
punishment for failure to cooperate during interrogations or for violations
of prison rules.
U.S. officials have publicly acknowledged that interrogation techniques
at Guantanamo have included the use of stress positions, isolation, and
removal of clothing, but have refused to allow human rights organizations
that report publicly, including Human Rights Watch, to examine
conditions at Guantanamo or interview detainees. According to press
reports in November, the International Committee of the Red Cross
told the U.S. government in confidential reports that its treatment of
detainees has involved psychological and physical coercion that is “tantamount
to torture.”
During 2004, three men—including two U.S. citizens—continued to be
held incommunicado and without charges, having been designated
“enemy combatants” by President Bush. After the Supreme Court ruled
that one, Yasser Hamdi,was entitled to his day in court, the U.S. government
and his attorneys negotiated his release and return to Saudia
Arabia (he had joint U.S. and Saudi citizenship). The United States
continues to insist in court that it has the authority to detain indefinitely
without charges the two others, Jose Padilla and Ali-Saleh Kahlah al-
Marri.
The U.S. also has “disappeared” at least eleven high-level al-Qaeda suspects,
holding them in undisclosed locations worldwide; some reportedly
have been tortured. It has also facilitated or participated directly in
the transfer of an unknown number of people to countries in the Middle East where torture is routine. (See “Darfur and Abu Ghraib,” in
this volume.)
Military Commissions
In August 2004, the military began legal proceedings before newly created
military commissions against four Guantanamo detainees, the first
to be charged with crimes. The commissions, authorized by a
November 2001 order by President Bush, are fatally flawed in design
and practice. They permit the executive branch broad powers as prosecutor,
judge, and jury without any civilian judicial oversight. They
sharply limit a defendant’s rights to present a defense, including by
allowing the use of evidence that the accused may not see nor confront.
And they do not require that those sitting in judgment have any legal
training: in the initial hearings, the panel members, only one of whom
was a lawyer, were not familiar with basic concepts of criminal law, let
alone the complex international law issues at stake. Poor translations by
U.S. government interpreters made a mockery of hearings and raised
further fair trial concerns.
In November 2004, a federal district court ordered a halt in proceedings
in one of the commission cases. The court ruled the case was
improperly before a military commission because of the military’s failure
to determine the defendant’s legal status under the Geneva
Conventions and because commission rules of evidence violated fair
trial standards.
Material Witness Detentions
The U.S. government continues to misuse a federal material witness law
to secretly arrest and detain Muslim men in the U.S. indefinitely without
charge. This law was enacted to enable authorities to temporarily
detain a witness when his or her testimony is critical to a criminal proceeding
and the individual is likely to flee if not detained. Since September 11, the government has used the law to incarcerate terrorism
suspects while investigations into their activities continue. The Justice
Department still refuses to disclose the number of material witnesses it
has held in connection with the war on terror or any details about them,
citing national security concerns and grand jury rules.
On May 12, 2004, the government detained as a material witness U.S.
citizen Brandon Mayfield, an Oregon attorney and Muslim convert who
the government believed was linked to the March 11 Madrid bombing.
A month later, authorities released Mayfield when they learned that the
allegations against him were based on a faulty match of fingerprints
recovered from the bombing site. In November, an international panel
of scientists, commissioned by the FBI and led by the chief of the FBI’s
Quality Control unit to review the Mayfield case, strongly criticized the
FBI for an institutional culture that discouraged fingerprint examiners
from disagreeing with their superiors, blaming the faulty match on such
pressures rather than technological failures, the explanation originally
given by the FBI.
Immigration
Congressional and executive efforts to curtail the rights of immigrants
through new legislation and administrative policies continued unabated
throughout 2004. Non-citizens face violations of their right to seek asylum,
to be free from arbitrary detention, to defend against their deportation
when it will result in separation from their U.S. citizen children
or other close family members, and to be afforded full and fair deportation
hearings.
The United States has for many years used a unique preliminary asylum
screening process for Haitians fleeing their country who have been
interdicted at sea. This rudimentary policy fails to guarantee fair access
to screening for Haitians who fear being returned to a place where their
lives or freedom are threatened. Haitians fleeing their country following the exile of Haitian President Aristide on February 29, 2004 were sent
back in record numbers. By October 2004, 3229 had been interdicted at
sea. Only ten were found to be refugees. As of this writing, they are
confined to the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, contrary to
international standards limiting restrictions on the free movement of
refugees. The U.S. government is searching for other countries that will
take them in.
In December 2003, the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of
Justice issued a report on the treatment in detention of non-citizens
arrested after the September 11 attacks because of suspected links to
terrorism. The report confirmed Human Rights Watch’s findings in
2002 that some of the detainees had been physically abused. According
to the Inspector General, guards in the federal Metropolitan Detention
Center in Brooklyn maliciously slammed detainees against walls, twisted
their fingers and wrists, and jerked their restraints to make the detainees
fall. None of the detainees were indicted for crimes related to the
September 11 attacks. Most were eventually deported for ordinary visa
violations.
The U.S. has continued to adopt new immigration policies based on an
assumed link between non-citizens and terrorism. In June 2004, the
Department of Homeland Security announced that it would begin subjecting
every undocumented non-citizen within 160 miles of the
Mexican or Canadian border to “expedited procedures” to determine
whether they are legally present. If not, they are immediately deported
without a hearing.
The new policy has raised concerns about the training and capacity of
border agents to assess the legal status of non-citizens and the viability
of their asylum claims. A U.N. report leaked to the New York Times in
August 2004 revealed that similar expedited procedures, in place at U.S.
airports since 1996, have resulted in some non-citizens being harassed and intimidated, discouraged from seeking asylum, and interviewed
without translators by airport inspectors ignorant of asylum law.
Criminal Justice
Despite steadily dropping crime rates, harsh sentencing policies continue
to fuel the expansion of the nation’s jail and prison population, which
reached a new high of 2.2 million in 2003. The United States—which
has less than 5 percent of the world’s population—holds nearly 23 percent
of the world’s prisoners. Racial disparities in the criminal justice
system remain pronounced and minor drug offenses continue to constitute
a significant number of total arrests.
In response to escalating prison costs, some states have begun instituting
sentencing reforms to reduce prison populations, but there is still
considerable resistance. In California, for example, voters in November
2004 rejected an initiative to reform the state’s infamous “three strikes
law,” which imposes a mandatory life sentence on anyone who commits
a third criminal offense, even a minor one such as petty theft.
Prisons generally fail to provide safe and humane conditions of confinement
or adequate rehabilitative services and programs for prisoners.
Prison rape remains a serious problem. The congressionally authorized
National Prison Rape Reduction Commission began working in 2004 to
document the problem and establish standards to eliminate it. Its work
complements other new federal efforts to develop reliable statistics on
the prevalence of prison rape, and to provide anti-rape grants and training
to prison authorities.
Some 16 percent of prisoners are mentally ill, and prison mental health
services are woefully deficient. In October 2004, Congress passed legislation
that will provide federal funds to help divert the mentally ill from
the criminal justice system and to improve their treatment when incarcerated.
Medical treatment of prisoners is substandard in many prisons. 
After several prisoners with HIV/AIDS died due to appalling living
conditions and negligent or incompetent medical care, the Alabama
Department of Corrections in June 2004 settled a lawsuit against it by
agreeing to improve the care and treatment of prisoners with
HIV/AIDS.
In his 2004 State of the Union address, President Bush declared:
“America is the land of the second chance—and when the gates of the
prison open, the path ahead should lead to a better life.” He proposed a
reentry initiative for the nearly 650,000 men and women returning each
year from state and federal prisons. Congress has introduced legislation
that would fund expanded access to treatment, transitional housing, and
other services to ease the transition from prison to home.
Federal and local public housing policies, however, exclude hundreds of
thousands of needy Americans because they have criminal records,
denying them the opportunity to obtain decent, stable, and affordable
housing. While such exclusions ostensibly protect existing tenants, the
policies are so arbitrary, overbroad, and harsh that they exclude persons
arrested for minor offenses and people who have turned their lives
around and remain law-abiding.
Close to 30 percent of HIV infections in the U.S. result from the sharing
of syringes by injection drug users. In every state, possession of
syringes for the purposes of injecting illegal drugs can be a crime,
restricting effective sterile syringe programs, such as needle exchange,
that reduce the spread of HIV. In 2004, needle exchange program volunteers
distributing clean syringes were arrested in at least two states—
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.
In the U.S. as well as internationally, the U.S. government continues to
promote HIV prevention programs that promote sexual abstinence and
marital fidelity, while censoring lifesaving information about condoms
as a means of HIV prevention. Funding for “abstinence only” programs has greatly increased during the Bush administration. A growing body
of evidence indicates these programs may actually increase HIV risk
among teens by discouraging use of condoms and other safe-sex measures.
Death Penalty
By mid-October, the U.S. had carried out forty-eight executions during
2004. Over 3,400 men and women were on death row at the end of the
year, including almost eighty juvenile offenders. The Supreme Court
heard arguments in October in a case that will decide the constitutionality
of the death penalty for juvenile offenders. Nineteen states and the
federal government have already set eighteen as the minimum age for
the death penalty. The Court’s decision will determine whether the U.S.
will leave the company of Iran and China, which are among the few
states in the world that sentence juvenile offenders to death.
Five death row inmates were exonerated in 2004, bringing to 117 the
number of men released from death row since 1973 because of evidence
of their innocence. In August, a Louisiana death row inmate, Ryan
Matthews, convicted of murder in 1999, was cleared of all charges after
new DNA evidence exonerated him. Matthews is the fourteenth and
most recent death row inmate freed with the help of DNA evidence.
In October 2004, the Congress passed the Innocence Protection Act
(IPA) as part of a larger anti-crime bill. The IPA seeks to prevent
wrongful executions by raising the standards for adequate representation
in death penalty cases, providing greater access to post-conviction
DNA testing, and ensuring that those exonerated through DNA evidence
in federal cases receive compensation.
In March 2004, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled that the
U.S. had violated the rights of fifty-four Mexican nationals on death
row because they had not been informed of their right to talk to their consular officials after they were arrested, as required by the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations. The court rejected the U.S. argument
that the clemency process offered an adequate remedy and insisted
that the courts had to provide “effective” review of the convictions to
determine whether the violations caused “actual prejudice” to any of the
fifty-four men. The ICJ ruling did not affect other foreign nationals on
death row; Hung Thanh Le, a Vietnamese national, was executed in
Oklahoma despite his denial of consular notification. More than 120
foreign nationals from twenty-nine countries remain on death row in
the United States.