UE@K<; SK8K<J
The US incarcerates more people than any other country in the world, sometimes
imposing very long sentences marred by racial disparities. Increasing
numbers of non-citizens—363,000 in 2010—are held in immigration detention
facilities, although many are not dangerous or at risk of absconding from immigration
proceedings.
The federal government continues abusive counterterrorism policies, including
detentions without charge at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; fundamentally flawed
military commissions; and effectively blocking lawsuits seeking redress for torture
victims.
The US Census reported in 2011 that 46 million people live in poverty, the
largest number in the 52 years for which poverty estimates have been published.
Widespread poverty, its many intersections with racial and gender
inequalities, and its disproportionate impact upon children and the elderly,
raises serious human rights concerns.
Death Penalty and Extreme Criminal Punishments
In 2011 the state of Illinois joined 15 other states in abolishing the death penalty.
Thirty-four states continue to allow its imposition. At this writing 39 people
have been executed in 2011, continuing a downward trend from 2009, when 52
people were executed.
The state of Georgia executed Troy Davis on September 21, 2011, despite significant
doubts about his guilt. Davis, who was sentenced to death for the 1989
murder of off-duty police officer Mark MacPhail, maintained his innocence until
the last moment. The prosecution’s case rested almost entirely on testimony
from eyewitnesses, but seven of the nine who testified against Davis at his trial
recanted and said they were no longer sure who shot MacPhail, and another
three people said that another man confessed to the crime.
While the US Supreme Court held in 2010 that youth offenders under age 18
convicted of non-homicide crimes could not be sentenced to life without the possibility of parole, about 2,600 youth offenders continue to serve such a sentence
for homicide-related crimes. State-level efforts continue to reform life
without parole when sentencing youth. For example, California is slated in early
2012 to vote on a bill to allow reconsideration and resentencing of youth
offenders serving life without parole.
Youth convicted of sex offenses in adult and juvenile courts also met with harsh
treatment. July 2011 marked the deadline for all states and other jurisdictions to
comply with the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act. The act requires
jurisdictions to register people aged 14 and up convicted of certain sexual
offenses on a national, publicly accessible, online registry. In some cases youth
will be registered for life. The Department of Justice (DOJ) says 14 states have
now substantially implemented the act.
Prison Conditions
The US continued to have the world’s largest incarcerated population at 2.3 million,
and the world’s highest per capita incarceration rate at 752 inmates per
100,000 residents.
In December 2010 Human Rights Watch reported on the unnecessary pre-trial
detention of thousands of people accused of minor crimes in New York City due
to their inability to pay even small amounts of bail. Almost 90 percent of those
arrested in 2008 for non-felony crimes who had bail set at US$1,000 or less
were incarcerated pre-trial solely because they could not post bail.
The US Supreme Court decided in May that the state of California must reduce
prison overcrowding. California prisons have failed to provide adequate medical
and mental health care for decades, and a lower court panel found that
prison under-staffing and severe overcrowding had led to such substandard
care. The panel directed the state to significantly cut its prison population to
improve care; the US Supreme Court agreed.
In February 2011 the DOJ issued its long-overdue proposed standards to implement
the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA). While some standards meet the
2009 PREA Commission recommendations, several proposed standards are significantly
weaker. For example, the proposed DOJ standards do not clearly require facilities to be staffed sufficiently to prevent, detect, and respond to the
sexual abuse of prisoners. The standards would leave survivors of sexual
assault without legal remedy because they were unable to comply with unduly
strict internal grievance procedures. The proposed standards also explicitly
exclude immigration detention facilities from coverage. At this writing the final
PREA standards have not been issued.
This year Nevada, Hawaii, Idaho, and Rhode Island enacted laws restricting the
shackling of pregnant prisoners, bringing the number of states with such laws
to 14.
Racial Disparities in the Criminal Justice System
Racial and ethnic minorities continue to be disproportionately represented in
the criminal justice system. Whites and African Americans engage in drug
offenses at roughly equivalent rates, and African Americans account for only
about 13 percent of the US population, yet African Americans comprised about
33 percent of all drug arrests in 2009. Not surprisingly, higher arrest rates lead
to higher incarceration rates. For example, 45 percent of inmates in state prisons
for drug offenses in 2009 were African American; only 27 percent were
white.
Persons of color comprise 77 percent of all youth serving life without parole
sentences. And for the first time in the country’s history in 2011, people of Latin
American origin made up the majority of federal prisoners in the US, due to the
federal government’s increased focus on prosecuting unauthorized immigrants.
African Americans have historically borne the burden of far harsher federal sentences
for crack cocaine offenses compared to powder cocaine offenses. The
Fair Sentencing Act, passed in August 2010, partially reduced these sentencing
disparities. However the act was not explicitly retroactive. In June 2011 the US
Sentencing Commission voted to make the new sentencing guidelines retroactive,
so that 12,040 offenders are now eligible for reduced sentences.
Non-Citizens’ Rights
There are approximately 25.3 million non-citizens in the US, of which the government
estimates 10.8 million are without authorization. Sixty-one percent of
these unauthorized immigrants have lived in the US for 10 years or more.
In fiscal year 2010 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) deported
387,242 non-citizens—over twice as many as in fiscal year 2000—and detained
over 363,000 persons in immigration detention facilities, an increase of over 50
percent since fiscal year 2005. The unchecked expansion of immigration detention
in the US over the past two decades has led to a nationwide detention system
comprised of over 300 facilities, from small local jails to large, dedicated
immigration detention facilities.
In June Human Rights Watch documented the vast numbers of detainees who
are subjected to chaotic, frequent, and recurrent transfers between facilities.
Between 1998 and 2010 there were over two million detainee transfers. Two
hundred thousand detainees were transferred three or more times. On average,
detainees were moved 370 miles between facilities, while a common transfer
route between Pennsylvania and Texas covered 1,600 miles. The frequent transfers
interfere with detainees’ access to counsel, witnesses, evidence, and family
support.
In August the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) declared a fingerprintsharing
program mandatory, reversing prior policy. The Secure Communities
program requires local law enforcement to share fingerprints with DHS, which
claims that Secure Communities is used to identify and remove non-citizens
convicted of serious crimes. However, 59 percent of those removed under the
program between October 2008 and July 2011 had no criminal convictions or
had convictions only for minor offenses, including traffic offenses. Several local
law enforcement agencies and community groups across the country have vigorously
opposed Secure Communities, arguing it impedes community policing
and encourages racial profiling. DHS plans nationwide implementation by 2013.
In one of the few rights-protective immigration reforms in 2011, DHS announced
that it will undertake case-by-case reviews of over 300,000 pending deportation
cases and cases deemed to be low-priority will be administratively closed, allowing some potential deportees to remain in the country with temporary
legal status. In identifying low-priority cases DHS will weigh non-citizens’ family
and community ties, military service, and whether they arrived in the US as children.
Congress criticized the flaws in the country’s immigration system but failed to
act. The Senate held a hearing in June on the DREAM Act, a bill that would grant
legal status to non-citizens brought to the US as children, but it took no further
action. The House of Representatives held several hearings on bills that would
tighten border and visa security, require the detention of certain immigrants,
and reduce both unauthorized and authorized immigration, but voted on none
of these measures.
In April the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals partially enjoined Arizona’s Senate
Bill 1070 from going into effect. Governor Jan Brewer has appealed the decision
to the US Supreme Court. Alabama surpassed Arizona in mid-2011 by passing
what is likely the country’s strictest state-level immigration measure. The law
criminalizes transporting or renting to an unauthorized immigrant and requires
public schools to document their students’ immigration status, among other
measures. The Alabama law has also been temporarily partially enjoined, as
have similarly problematic laws in Utah, Indiana, and Georgia. Nevertheless,
appeals courts allowed several problematic provisions in the Alabama law to go
into effect.
Labor Rights
US workers continue to face severe obstacles in forming and joining trade
unions, and the federal government and many state governments are failing to
meet their international obligations to protect the free exercise of these rights.
Several states—including Arizona, Indiana, Michigan, New Hampshire, Ohio,
Oklahoma, and Wisconsin—placed severe restrictions in 2011 on workers’ rights
to bargain collectively.
Hundreds of thousands of children work on US farms. The 1938 Fair Labor
Standards Act specifically exempts farmworker children from the minimum age
and maximum hour requirements that apply to all other working children, exposing them to work at younger ages, for longer hours, and under more hazardous
conditions. As a result, child farmworkers, most of who are of Latin
American descent, often work 10 or more hours a day and risk pesticide poisoning,
heat illness, injuries, life-long disabilities, and death. More than half of all
working children who suffered fatal occupational injuries in 2010 worked in
crop production, up from previous years. Many child farmworkers drop out of
school, and girls are sometimes subjected to sexual harassment. Federal protections
that do exist are often not enforced: agricultural inspections and child
labor law violations declined in 2010. Notably, in August the Department of
Labor proposed to expand the list of hazardous agricultural tasks prohibited for
children under age 16. (Outside agriculture federal law bans hazardous work for
children under age 18).
Millions of US workers, including parents of infants, are harmed by weak or
non-existent laws on paid leave, breastfeeding accommodation, and discrimination
against workers with family responsibilities. A February 2011 Human
Rights Watch report showed that having scarce or no paid leave contributed to
delaying babies’ immunizations, postpartum depression, and other health
problems, and caused mothers to stop breastfeeding early.
Health Policy
HIV infections in the US continued to rise at an alarming rate in 2011, particularly
in minority communities. Many states continue to undermine human rights
and public health with restrictions on sex education, inadequate legal protections
for HIV-positive persons, resistance to harm-reduction programs such as
syringe exchanges, and failure to fund HIV prevention and care. Human Rights
Watch reported in 2011 on state laws and policies that are blocking access to
HIV treatment and services in Mississippi, where half of those testing positive
for HIV are not in care and the death rate from AIDS is 60 percent higher than
the national average. Human Rights Watch also highlighted the struggle to
expand syringe access to injection drug users in North Carolina, where laws
criminalizing syringe possession are forcing exchange programs to operate
underground and advocates to risk arrest on a daily basis.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In a 2011 decision the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that
the US violated the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man when
the government failed to enforce a restraining order obtained by a wife against
an abusive husband who abducted the couple’s daughters in Colorado in 1999.
The commission recommended that the US make enforcement of protection
orders mandatory, adopt protection measures for children in domestic violence
situations, and better train officials on domestic violence prevention and
response.
The US Supreme Court ruled in June 2011 that 1.5 million women employees of
Walmart could not constitute a class for a class action suit against the corporation
for discrimination in pay and advancement opportunities. The decision
calls into question the viability of large-scale gender discrimination suits in the
US, where women earn an average of 77 cents for every dollar earned by men.
Rights relating to abortion access continued to be heavily contested in 2011,
with fights at the state and national levels over insurance coverage for abortion
and over patients’ rights to information and services. Federal judges ruled
against laws in Baltimore and New York City that would have required “crisis
pregnancy centers” to inform clients that they do not provide abortions or certain
methods of contraception.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
US law offers no protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation
or gender identity. In December 2010 President Barack Obama signed the
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell Repeal Act of 2010,” which repealed the discriminatory
policy barring gays and lesbians from serving openly in the US military, pending
military review. The repeal went into effect in September 2011.
The Defense of Marriage Act continues to bar recognition of same-sex marriage
at the federal level. However, in February the DOJ informed Congress that it
would not continue defending in the courts the constitutionality of the provision
that defines “marriage” as a legal union between one man and one
woman.
Same-sex marriages are not recognized or performed in forty-one states. In June
New York state passed the Marriage Equality Act, becoming the sixth and
largest state (Washington, DC, is the seventh jurisdiction) to grant these marriage
licenses. At this writing the California Supreme Court was considering
jurisdictional questions raised by a challenge to a district court decision that
California’s 2008 same-sex marriage ban (Proposition 8) was unconstitutional.
Hawaii, Connecticut, and Nevada passed measures to ban employment discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity. In August a federal
appeals court upheld a lower court’s decision that declared unconstitutional a
Wisconsin law barring transgender inmates from receiving hormone therapy or
sex reassignment surgery, even when medically necessary.
Disability Rights
According to the US government, persons with disabilities are almost twice as
likely as those without disabilities to be victims of violence. While the
2009 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Hate Crime Prevention Act increased
awareness of hate crimes against people with disabilities, underreporting of
these crimes remains a concern.
Counterterrorism
Despite overwhelming evidence that senior Bush administration officials
approved illegal interrogation methods involving torture and other ill-treatment
after September 11, 2001, the Obama administration failed to criminally investigate
high-level officials or to establish a commission of inquiry.
A long-awaited investigation by Special Prosecutor John Durham concluded
that further criminal investigation was warranted only with respect to the
deaths in custody of two detainees, but there have been no investigations into
hundreds of other instances of detainee abuse. The Obama administration continued
to invoke an overly broad interpretation of the “state secrets” privilege
in civil suits brought by current and former detainees alleging abuse, further
limiting a possible avenue for redress for victims of torture and other ill-treatment.
In December 2010 Congress enacted funding restrictions limiting the administration’s
ability to repatriate and resettle Guantanamo detainees. The only
detainee transferred in 2011 was sent against his will to Algeria where he feared
he would be tortured. While Human Rights Watch has not received reports of
abuse since his return, the US refused to allow an independent arbiter to review
his claim of fear of torture.
In March 2011 Obama signed an executive order establishing a periodic administrative
review system for detainees currently held at Guantanamo and either
designated for indefinite detention, or for trial but not yet facing charges. At
this writing no implementing regulations have been issued.
Proposed legislation in Congress seeks to expand US domestic authority to
detain alleged terrorism suspects indefinitely without charge and to mandate
military detention for a certain category of terrorism suspects. In February a
detainee pled guilty before a military commission and was sentenced to 34
months, conditioned upon his continued cooperation with the government, or
14 years otherwise.
The military commission appellate court ruled in two cases that military commissions
have jurisdiction over conspiracy and material support for terrorism,
crimes that have never previously been considered as war crimes under international
law. In April 2011 Attorney General Eric Holder announced that he had
reversed his earlier decision to prosecute the five men accused of plotting the
9/11 attacks in federal court and would instead try them before a military commission.
Charges were sworn against the five men. Charges were also referred
against the man accused of plotting the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in
October 2000; he was arraigned in November before a military commission.
The Obama administration announced in July 2011 that it had captured a terrorism
suspect off the coast of Somalia and detained him on a ship for nearly two
months before the International Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to
visit him in detention. He was later transferred to New York for prosecution in
federal court.
In May 2011 a team of US Navy SEALS killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden
in Abbotabad, Pakistan. In September Anwar al Awlaki, a cleric with US citizen ship who Obama described as the “leader of external operations” for al Qaeda
in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), was killed by a US-operated drone strike in
Yemen. Another US citizen, Samir Khan, who was the editor of AQAP’s online
magazine Inspire, was killed in the same strike. In October a drone attack killed
Awlaki’s 16-year-old son, along with several others; the US has said the son
was not the target. Despite calls for greater transparency, the US continues to
be vague about the legal justifications for these killings and about who can be
targeted, when, and under what conditions.
In September Human Rights Watch uncovered a cache of documents in Tripoli
that detailed the CIA’s role in the rendition of terrorism suspects to Libya, as
well as its role in questioning those suspects once in Libya. The CIA participated
in these actions despite overwhelming evidence at the time that the suspects
would likely face torture.