United States
US criminal justice policy continues to raise serious human rights concerns. 2008
saw the resumption of executions after a seven-month hiatus and continued
growth of the US prison population, already the world’s largest. Also in 2008,
Human Rights Watch confirmed that there are more than 2,500 US prisoners serving
sentences of life without possibility of parole for crimes committed when they
were under 18; no other country imposes this penalty on juvenile offenders.
In positive developments, the US Supreme Court struck down a law that barred
Guantanamo detainees from challenging the legality of their detention, and the
Department of Justice brought its first prosecution under a 1994 law allowing
courts to try torture committed abroad by US citizens or anyone present in the
United States.
Death Penalty
From September 2007 until May 2008 there were no executions in the United
States while the Supreme Court considered whether lethal injection—the method
used by all US death penalty jurisdictions—constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
In April 2008 the Court ruled in Baze v. Rees that it does not, and executions
quickly resumed. Between May and October 2008 there were 30 executions,
half of which were in Texas.
Nevertheless, courts and legislatures continue to narrow the scope of capital punishment.
In December 2007 New Jersey abolished the death penalty, becoming
the first state in more than 40 years to do so. In June 2008 in Kennedy v.
Louisiana the US Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty may not be imposed
for any crime against another person that does not result in death. US courts pronounced
110 new death sentences in 2007, the lowest number since capital punishment
was reinstated in 1976.
Between January and October 2008, four prisoners were exonerated and released
from death row, bringing to 130 the number of death-sentenced prisoners
released since 1973 due to evidence of their innocence. 2008 saw a step backward for non-citizens sentenced to death without being
allowed to contact their consular officials as required by the Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations. On August 5, Texas executed Mexican national José
Medellin despite an International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision directing the
United States to reexamine such cases, and a directive from President George W.
Bush that state courts comply with the ICJ ruling.
Juvenile Life without Parole
In 2008 Human Rights Watch revised upward to 2,502 our estimate of the number
of persons in the United States sentenced to life without the possibility of parole
for crimes committed when they were under age 18. We also verified that there
are no juvenile offenders serving this sentence anywhere else in the world.
Efforts to end juvenile life without parole in the United States continue with
reform legislation pending in Congress and in state legislatures in California,
Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, and Nebraska. In 2008 the United Nations
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination recommended that the
United States, “in light of the disproportionate imposition” of the sentence on
racial minorities, discontinue its use for crimes committed by individuals under
18 and review the status of people already serving such sentences.
Incarceration
A June 2008 report by the US Justice Department’s Bureau of Justice Statistics
found that the incarcerated population had reached an all-time high of 2.3 million,
or 762 per 100,000 residents. The United States continues to have both the
largest incarcerated population and the highest per capita incarceration rate in
the world.
The burden of incarceration falls disproportionately on members of racial and ethnic
minorities. Black men are incarcerated at six times the rate of white men, and
10.7 percent of all black males age 30 to 34 are behind bars on any given day. A
2008 Human Rights Watch report, “Targeting Blacks,” found that racial disparities
are even worse for drug offenders, with a black man almost 12 times more likely than a white man to enter prison with a new drug conviction, despite similar rates
of drug use among blacks and whites.
In March 2008 the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination expressed “concern with regard to the persistent racial disparities
in the criminal justice system … including the disproportionate number of persons
belonging to racial, ethnic and national minorities in the prison population,”
and urged the United States to “take all necessary steps to guarantee the right of
everyone to equal treatment before tribunals and all other organs administering
justice.”
One out of five state prisoners in the United States is incarcerated for a drug-related
offense. Many prisoners, particularly those convicted of drug possession or
property crimes, have histories of substance use and addiction. The prevalence of
diseases related to injection drug use such as HIV/AIDS and hepatitis C is significantly
greater among prisoners than in the general population. Yet US prisons and
jails remain resistant, even hostile, to evidence-based practices such as condom
distribution or methadone therapy, which have proven to reduce transmission of
HIV, hepatitis C, and sexually transmitted diseases and to treat drug addiction.
The Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) of 1996 creates a variety of obstacles for
prisoners seeking to vindicate their rights in court. These restrictions—which
apply only to prisoners—have resulted in dismissal of lawsuits alleging sexual
abuse and other significant injuries. In November 2007 a bill was introduced in
the House of Representatives to amend or repeal some provisions of the PLRA.
Corporal Punishment in Public Schools
According to the US Department of Education, more than 200,000 public school
students received corporal punishment at least once during the 2006-2007
school year. Corporal punishment—which typically takes the form of one or more
blows on the buttocks with a wooden paddle—is legal in public schools in 21
states. A 2008 Human Rights Watch report, “A Violent Education,” focuses on corporal
punishment in Texas and Mississippi, two of the states where it is most
prevalent. The report found that corporal punishment can result in serious injury and is used disproportionately against black students and special education students.
Women’s Rights
Struggles to achieve pay equity for women continued in 2008, with members of
Congress working to overturn a 2007 Supreme Court decision that narrowly construed
the statute of limitations for pay discrimination lawsuits against employers.
Despite widespread mobilization by women’s rights groups, the Lilly
Ledbetter Fair Pay Act died in the Senate after passing the House of
Representatives. Nonetheless, the gender pay gap narrowed to its smallest size in
history, with women earning 78 cents for every dollar earned by men.
US international aid remains laden with restrictions that undermine the sexual
and reproductive rights of women. Congress in 2008 reauthorized the President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief for another five years, but continued to direct
funding toward abstinence-only programs and retained the requirement that
organizations pledge their opposition to sex work before receiving US funds.
Similarly, the “global gag rule” continues to prohibit foreign organizations receiving
US funding from providing abortions, counseling women about abortion, or
engaging in advocacy for abortion rights, even if no US funds would be used in
those efforts.
Sexual Violence
In the United States, the crime of rape has one of the lowest arrest, prosecution,
and conviction rates among serious violent crimes. In 2008 Human Rights Watch
began an investigation into the failure of law enforcement authorities to preserve
and test evidence in rape cases. When reporting a sexually violent crime, a victim
is asked to submit to a four- to six-hour exam to collect DNA evidence that, if tested,
may aid in the criminal investigation. But the Justice Department estimates
that up to 500,000 of these rape kits sit untested in crime labs and police storage
facilities across the United States. In Los Angeles alone there are over 7,300
untested rape kits, with the backlog growing by about 30 a month.
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity
US law continues to offer no national protections against discrimination based on
sexual orientation or gender identity, in employment or other areas of life. The
Defense of Marriage Act, which prohibits the federal government from recognizing
the relationships formed by same-sex couples, remains in force. In 2008 the
California and Connecticut supreme courts ruled in favor of equal access to marriage
for same-sex couples in those states, but a statewide referendum in
November overturned the California ruling. The Uniting American Families Act,
which would allow same-sex relationships between a US citizen and a foreign
national to be recognized for immigration purposes, did not advance in Congress.
Rights of Non-Citizens
There are some 38 million non-citizens living in the United States, of whom nearly
12 million are undocumented. In 2008 this population faced human rights problems
largely similar to those in previous years.
As documented in our 2007 report, “Forced Apart,” legal immigrants who have
lived in the United States for decades, including lawful permanent residents, are
summarily deported under laws passed in 1996 if they have been convicted of a
crime, even a non-violent offense such as shoplifting or low-level drug possession.
During the deportation proceedings, judges are not permitted to balance
the seriousness of a non-citizen’s crime against his lawful presence in the US,
family relationships (including with a US citizen spouse and minor children), business
ownership, tax payments, service in the US military, or likelihood of persecution
after deportation. In 2006, the most recent year for which data are available,
the number of non-citizens deported increased yet again, to 95,752 from
90,426 in 2005, bringing the total number of persons deported under these laws
to 768,345.
In 2008 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement continued a pattern begun in
2007 of large-scale workplace raids in search of undocumented workers. In
August 2008, in the largest such raid in US history; nearly 600 non-citizens were
arrested in Laurel, Mississippi.
Similarly, in May 2008 immigration agents rounded up 389 undocumented workers
at a meatpacking plant in Postville, Iowa. After the raids, Iowa’s attorney general
filed more than 9,300 criminal misdemeanor charges against the plant’s owners
and managers for labor law violations including child labor and long shifts
without overtime pay. Prosecutors, however, also threatened to charge workers—
some of whom had used false IDs to obtain work—with aggravated identity theft,
a charge that carries severe penalties and is aimed at persons committing theft
by fraud rather than undocumented immigrants seeking jobs.
The United States detains approximately 300,000 non-citizens each year at an
annual cost of US$1.8 billion, according to Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE). Non-citizens are held in some 300 detention facilities: about two dozen are
directly under the control of ICE, although some are operated by private companies,
and the remainder are state and local prisons and jails that contract with
ICE to provide bed space for ICE detainees.
The large number of detained non-citizens in the United States raises multiple
human rights concerns. In a December 2007 report, “Chronic Indifference,” we
found that ICE fails to monitor adequately the medical care of detainees with HIV,
and does not comply with international or national guidelines for appropriate HIV
treatment. Research by Human Rights Watch into medical care for women in
immigration detention facilities similarly found inadequate provision of routine
gynecological care, cervical and breast cancer screenings and diagnosis, family
planning services, pre- and post-natal care, and services for survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence.
A series of articles published in the Washington Post in May 2008 revealed that
30 non-citizens died in detention between 2003 and 2008 as a result of actions
taken or not taken by medical staff.
In a positive step, Congress repealed the 15-year-old law barring HIV-positive noncitizens
from entering the United States. Although President Bush has signed the
bill, at this writing the administration had not yet passed regulations to fully
implement repeal of the travel ban.
Guantanamo Bay, Indefinite Detention, and Military
Commissions
Although President Bush said he would like to see the detention facility at
Guantanamo Bay closed, 255 men remained there at this writing, and no steps to
close the facility were expected before the end of the administration. The vast
majority of these detainees have been held for nearly seven years without charge.
More than half are held in high-security facilities where they spend 22 hours a
day in small cells with no natural light or fresh air and few diversions.
In June 2008 the Supreme Court in Boumediene v. Bush struck down a law that
denied Guantanamo detainees the right to bring federal habeas corpus challenges
to the legality of their detention. Nearly all of the detainees filed habeas
petitions, but these cases have been delayed by a host of procedural and legal
questions such as whether hearings can be conducted in secret.
More than two dozen detainees who were cleared for release cannot be returned
to their home countries due to the likelihood that they would face torture upon
return. In October 2008 a federal court ruled that the United States must release
17 Chinese Uighurs detained at Guantanamo into the United States. The US government
had acknowledged that the men posed no threat but could not be
returned to China because they face persecution there. A federal appeals court
issued a stay of that order, and the fate of these men remained undecided at this
writing.
The United States has continued to repatriate other Guantanamo detainees without
meaningful or independent assessment of the risk of torture or abuse they
faced upon return. While some detainees obtained court orders requiring advance
notice of any transfer, many detainees do not have such orders in place. The
United States has claimed that “diplomatic assurances”—promises of humane
treatment—from the receiving governments are sufficient protection against
abuse, despite compelling evidence to the contrary.
The US government continues to detain Qatari citizen Ali Saheh Kahlah al-Marri in
the United States as an “enemy combatant” without charge or trial. Al-Marri was
first declared an enemy combatant in 2003, just weeks before his scheduled trial
for financial fraud and giving false statements. In 2007 a federal appeals court panel ruled that al-Marri’s detention was unlawful, but the full court overturned
the decision. Al-Marri has appealed that ruling to the US Supreme Court.
Meanwhile, the administration continues to prosecute Guantanamo detainees
before military commissions that lack fundamental due process guarantees. In
May 2008 the US government filed military commission charges seeking the
death penalty against Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and four other detainees
accused of responsibility for the September 11 attacks. All five were held in secret
CIA prisons before they were brought to Guantanamo, and were reportedly subject
to years of torture and other abuse. No trial date has been set. The United
States is also pursuing cases against 15 other detainees, including Omar Khadr
and Mohammed Jawad, who were juveniles when they were first brought to
Guantanamo nearly seven years ago.
Only three detainees had been convicted by military commissions at this writing.
Australian David Hicks was convicted by plea agreement in March 2007 and is
now free in Australia. The first military commission trial took place in July 2008
against Salim Ahmed Hamdan, Osama bin Laden’s former driver. Hamdan was
acquitted of conspiracy and convicted of providing material support to terrorism,
and sentenced to five-and-a-half years with credit for five years’ time served. As it
has said with respect to all Guantanamo detainees, the Bush administration contends
that Hamdan can be detained even after his sentence is completed. In
November 2008 Ali Hamza al Bahlul was convicted on terrorism charges and sentenced
to life in prison.
Torture Policy
Over the past three years Congress and the courts have repudiated the Bush
administration’s reliance on torture as an interrogation technique. In September
2006 the Pentagon announced new rules applicable to all US military interrogations
and disavowed abusive techniques, such as waterboarding, forced nudity,
and induced hypothermia. In February 2008 Congress passed legislation mandating
that the CIA adhere to these same rules, but it was vetoed by President Bush.
Secret CIA Prisons
In April 2008 the Department of Defense announced the transfer to Guantanamo
of a detainee previously held in CIA custody, indicating that the CIA’s secret prisons
were still operational as of that time. Two to three dozen former CIA detainees
remain “disappeared,” their whereabouts unknown. Many of them are believed to
have been unlawfully rendered to countries such as Syria, Libya, Pakistan, and
Algeria.
Denial of Refugee Protection
US law allows authorities to deny refugee protection to persons believed to have
associated with or provided “material support” to certain armed groups. The
broad terms of the law have led authorities to bar persons who qualify as
refugees under international law, including rape victims forced into domestic
servitude by rebel groups. In January 2008 Congress passed legislation that gave
the administration the power to waive these bars in deserving cases, but the
exercise of this discretion has been painstakingly slow.
Domestic Prosecution of Torture Abroad
In a positive development, the Department of Justice brought its first case under a
1994 law allowing courts to try torture committed abroad by US citizens or anyone
present in the US. A Miami jury in October 2008 convicted Charles “Chuckie”
Taylor, Jr., the son of the former Liberian president and a US citizen, on several
counts of torture for crimes committed by the elite military unit he headed in
Liberia from 1997 to 2003.
Key International Actors
At the conclusion of his June 2008 visit, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions called on the United States to improve its
military justice system and to ensure that the death penalty is applied fairly and
without racial discrimination. The special rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance expressed concern about residential racial segregation and the poor state of public education
after his visit in mid-2008.
Although the European Union has called on the United States to close the
Guantanamo detention facility, it has not publicly criticized the military commissions
or made concrete proposals regarding trial or release of Guantanamo
detainees. By contrast, the EU and member states have intervened and attempted
to halt executions in a number of US death penalty cases.