UNITED STATES
During the first eight months of George W. Bush’s presidency, the promotion
of human rights occupied a low priority in the administration’s
domestic political agenda. The president and Attorney General John Ashcroft were
criticized for insufficient concern about violations of individual rights and liberties,
particularly in the criminal justice context. Questions about the government’s commitment
to protect basic rights increased markedly as it developed anti-terrorist
measures after the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington. New laws
permitting the indefinite detention of non-citizens,special military commissions to
try suspected terrorists, the detention of over 1,000 people, and the abrogation of
the confidentiality of attorney-client communications for certain detainees,
demonstrated the administration’s troubling disregard for well established human
rights safeguards as it sought to protect national security. Indeed, in taking steps to
defend the U.S. from terrorists, the government adopted measures that eroded key
values and principles it said it sought to protect, including the rule of law.
Human rights violations prevalent during previous years continued under the
new president. They were most apparent in the criminal justice system—including
police brutality, unjustified racial disparities in incarceration, abusive conditions of
confinement, and use of the death penalty, including the execution of mentally
handicapped and juvenile offenders. But extensively documented violations also
included violations of immigrants’ rights, workers’ rights (including those of
migrant workers), harassment of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender youth in
schools, and of gay and lesbian members of the armed forces.
ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURES IN THE UNITED STATES
By November, over 1,100 people, mostly Arab or Muslim men, had been
detained in connection with the government’s investigation into the September 11
attacks and its efforts to preempt further acts of terrorism. The government
stopped updating the tally of those detained so firm figures were unavailable.After
refusing to make any information about the detainees public, including their
names, location of detention, or the nature of charges against them,Attorney General
Ashcroft finally announced on November 27 that 548 detainees were being held
on immigration charges and that federal criminal charges had been filed against
104 people. Senior law enforcement officials acknowledged that only a small number
of those in custody were believed to have links to terrorism. The immigration
charges were primarily for routine immigration violations, such as overstaying a visa, and the criminal charges also were primarily for crimes that seemed unrelated
to terrorism, ranging from credit card fraud to theft. Another two dozen or so
people were being detained as material witnesses. An unknown number of individuals
were held in local and state facilities in relation to the investigation of the
September 11 attacks.
The government’s refusal to reveal all the locations where the detainees were
being confined and its failure to grant access to known places of detention to independent
monitoring groups left many questions unanswered about the detainees’
treatment. Individual detainees reported problems with obtaining prompt access
to legal counsel, harsh conditions of confinement, and verbal and physical mistreatment—
especially in local jails used by the federal government to house
detainees with criminal inmates—but by the end of November it was still too early
to determine if there was any pattern of mistreatment.
The apparent refusal of some detainees to answer questions about possible links
with the al-Qaeda network led to a debate in the media about the possible need for
torture, “truth serums,” or sending the detainees to countries where harsher interrogation
tactics were common. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) denied
press reports that it had discussed such possibilities. Former military officials, various
political and criminal justice analysts, and others publicly argued that
“extraordinary times require extraordinary measures.” As of late November there
were no reports of abusive interrogation measures used against the detainees, but
the public debate over such measures underscored the need for greater transparency
regarding the location and treatment of the detainees.
The administration successfully secured from Congress a new anti-terrorism
law, the U.S.Patriot Act of 2001, that gave the attorney general unprecedented powers
to detain non-citizens on national security grounds.Under the law, the attorney
general could certify and detain non-citizens if he had “reasonable grounds to
believe” they had engaged in any of a broad range of terrorist acts or otherwise
threatened national security. After seven days, such individuals had to be charged
with a crime or an immigration violation or else be released. Certified aliens who
could not be deported could be held in custody indefinitely until the attorney general
determined that the person in question no longer presented a threat to national
security.The government released no information about the number of people certified
under this law.
The possibility of indefinite administrative detention of non-citizens was also
raised by the terms of a new interim Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
rule issued on September 17. This increased from twenty-four to forty-eight hours
the period a non-citizen could be detained by the INS before it had to make a determination
whether the detainee should remain in custody or be released on bond or
recognizance and whether to issue a notice to appear and warrant of arrest. But “in
situations involving an emergency or other extraordinary circumstances,” the new
measure stated, the forty-eight hour rule is suspended and the determinations
must simply be made “within a reasonable period of time.”The language triggering
the exception was signally vague, the time limit for the exception was open ended,
and there was no provision for judicial review of the detention—raising the possibility that non-U.S. citizens could be subjected to arbitrary and prolonged indefinite
detention without charges or recourse.
On October 31, the Justice Department issued a new rule that permitted the federal
government to monitor communications between inmates in federal custody
and their attorneys. Inmates were defined to include not only persons convicted of
a crime but anyone held as “witnesses, detainees or otherwise.” Under the rule,
communications could be monitored when the attorney general had “reasonable
suspicion” that the inmate would use communications with counsel to “further or
facilitate” acts of terrorism. In abrogating the confidentiality of attorney-client
communications and subjecting those communications to government surveillance,
the rule directly infringed on the right to counsel. Nevertheless, the administration
contended the right to counsel was protected because the inmate would be
notified before the monitoring began and a court order would be required before
any non-privileged information could be used by investigators or prosecutors.
On November 13, President Bush issued a highly controversial military order
authorizing the use of special military commissions to try non-citizens accused of
supporting or engaging in terrorist acts. Citing the danger to national safety posed
by international terrorism, the president claimed it was “not practicable” to try terrorists
under “the principles of law and the rules of evidence”that apply in the U.S.’s
domestic criminal justice system. Military commissions—ad hoc tribunals not
subject to the rules governing regular military courts-martial and their due process
safeguards—could function swiftly and secretly. There need be no presumption of
innocence, nor protection against forced confessions. Under the president’s order,
persons convicted by such commissions would have no right of appeal to a higher
court, a key fair trial requirement under international law, and they could be sentenced
to death by a two-thirds majority of the presiding officers. The language of
the order suggested the president may also have sought to preclude habeas corpus
petitions. The precise rules under which the commissions would function had not
been publicly issued by the end of November.
The order authorized military detention and trial for violations of the laws of
war or other “applicable laws” of anyone who is not a U.S. citizen if the president
should determine that “there is reason to believe” such an individual is or was a
member of al-Qaeda; had engaged in, aided or conspired to commit acts of international
terrorism; or had harbored terrorists.Terrorism, however, was not defined
in the president’s order. The order permitted military jurisdiction over non-citizen
civilians in the U.S. who otherwise would be subject to regular criminal trials with
the full panoply of due process safeguards that accompany such proceedings.
Unlike the other domestic anti-terrorism measures, the order provoked strong
protests from across the political spectrum. Some members of Congress urged the
administration to rescind the order, and Judiciary Committee hearings were scheduled
for the end of November and December to assess the order as well as other
administration actions following the September 11 attacks.
OVERINCARCERATION, DRUGS, AND RACE
In 2000, the number of adults under the supervision of the criminal justice system—
behind bars, on parole or on probation—reached a record 6.47 million, or
one in every thirty-two adults. The rate and absolute number of confined persons
continued to grow, although less than in previous years, but the number of inmates
in state prisons fell slightly in the second half of 2000. The rate of incarceration in
prison and jail was 699 inmates per 100,000, making the U.S. the world leader in
incarceration, surpassing Russia’s rate of 644 per 100,000, and giving the U.S. an
incarceration rate that was five to eight times higher than those of European countries.
Including inmates locked in prison, jails, juvenile detention and immigration
facilities, the number of persons behind bars topped two million. One in every 143
Americans was incarcerated, with racial minorities disproportionately affected.
Blacks and Hispanics accounted for 62.6 percent of all state or federal prisoners
even though they represent only 24 percent of total U.S. residents. Almost 10 percent
of black non-Hispanic men aged from twenty-five to twenty-nine were in
prison in 2000, compared to 1.1 percent of white men in the same age group.
The continued growth in the prison population, despite years of falling crime
rates, reflected the impact of public policies that lengthened sentences, imposed
mandatory prison terms even for minor, nonviolent drug crimes, and restricted
opportunities for early release. Also to blame was the high number of parolees
returned to prison, many for technical parole violations. Fifty two percent of the
state prison population had been convicted of nonviolent crimes, including 21 percent
for drug crimes (nearly a quarter of a million persons). Slightly more than 1.5
million state and local arrests were made in 1999 (the most recent year for which
data is available) for drug abuse violations, 46 percent of which involved marijuana.
Four out of every five drug arrests were for possession of an illegal substance. Some
460,000 persons were behind bars for drug offenses, a tenfold increase over 1980.
Blacks constituted 57.6 percent of all drug offenders in state prison,Hispanics 20.7
percent, and whites 20.2 percent.
Confronted with bulging prison populations, soaring costs, and a high percentage
of low level nonviolent offenders among inmates, some states began to move
away from punitive mandatory sentences for nonviolent offenders. For example,
Mississippi enacted a law allowing nonviolent first offenders to seek parole after
serving 25 percent of their sentence instead of 85 percent. Louisiana, almost half of
whose state prison population was convicted on drug-related charges, ended
mandatory prison time for certain nonviolent criminals, including persons convicted
of simple possession of small drug amounts, and shortened the length of
mandatory sentences for drug sellers. In Indiana, lawmakers repealed mandatory
twenty-year sentences for many drug offenders, restoring sentencing discretion to
judges. In New York, legislators debated but did not pass reforms of the state’s draconian
drug laws that would reduce mandate sentences, increase judicial discretion,
and expand opportunities for alternatives to prison. In November 2000,
Californians approved a ballot initiative mandating treatment instead of incarceration
for those guilty of drug possession or use.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Although over 40 billion dollars a year is spent on incarceration, the burgeoning
prison population overwhelmed the ability of corrections authorities to provide
safe,humane,and productive conditions of confinement.Politicians,who had been
eager to enact sentencing laws sending more people guilty of marginal crimes to
prison for longer sentences, were less eager to pay for the costs of operating high
quality facilities.Corrections officials lacked the funds to recruit,properly train and
retain adequate numbers of staff, to provide work, training or educational programs
that would keep inmates occupied and help them learn new skills, or to provide
substance abuse treatment or other rehabilitative activities.Most prisons were
overcrowded, impoverished facilities; many were rife with violence and gangs.
Growing recognition of the importance of preparing inmates for reentry to their
communities—about 600,000 are released from prison annually—prompted more
public attention to the need for rehabilitation programs, but little new funding was
made available.
Inmate violence in prisons caused injury and death. There were more than
31,000 inmate upon inmate assaults, a quarter of which resulted in injuries requiring
medical attention in 1999 (the most recent year for which data was available).
According to the Department of Justice, 10 percent of state inmates reported they
had been injured in a fight while in prison.
Rape was a common as well as a psychologically and physically devastating form
of violence among inmates.Certain prisoners were targeted for sexual exploitation
upon entering a penal facility, particularly those who were young, small, physically
weak, white, gay, first offenders or convicted of a sexual offense against a minor. In
extreme cases, some prisoners became “slaves” of their rapists. Although no conclusive
national data existed regarding the prevalence of prisoner-on-prisoner
rape, the most recent statistical survey showed that 21 percent of inmates in seven
prisons had experienced at least one episode of pressured or forced sex since entering
prison. Some rapes were brutal, leaving victims beaten, injured and, in the most
extreme cases, dead. Staff generally ignored or even reacted hostilely to inmates’
complaints of rape. Indeed, in many cases, they took actions that made sexual victimization
likely. Most correctional authorities denied that prisoner on prisoner
rape was a serious problem and failed to implement reasonable prevention and
punishment measures.
The use of electric stun and restraint devices against prison and jail inmates
caused injury and even death. In Florida, an inmate died after being kept for a day
in a restraining chair that immobilized him. Autopsy results were not available. In
Virginia, prison officials suspended the use of the Ultron II stun gun, which delivers
50,000 volts of electricity, after an autopsy implicated the weapon in the death
in 2000 of Lawrence Frazier, an inmate at Wallens Ridge State Prison. Frazier, an
insulin dependent inmate, began struggling with corrections officers during a
period when his blood sugar was dangerously low. The officers discharged the stun
device three times at him and then placed him in restraints. Frazier lapsed into a
coma and died several days later. In February, criminal charges were filed against six correctional officers in Arkansas who beat handcuffed prisoners and shocked them
with a stun gun and a cattle prod on their buttocks and testicles.
Inmates in Virginia’s supermaximum and high security prisons were placed in
five point restraints—limbs tied to the four corners of a bed frame with an additional
strap across the chest, leaving them fixed in a spread-eagled position unable
to move or tend to normal bodily functions. Although U.S. law prohibits corporal
punishment and five point restraints should only be used in emergency situations,
officers subjected inmates to restraints in response to minor nonviolent offenses,
including publicly masturbating, kicking the doors, and swearing at officers. Some
were kept restrained on their backs for as long as two or three days and forced to
urinate on themselves. The Department of Corrections implicitly acknowledged
the improper practice, settled a lawsuit challenging the use of restraints in one of
the prisons, and instituted a changed restraints policy. The Federal Bureau of Prisons
agreed to pay nearly $100,000 dollars to settle a lawsuit filed by an inmate who
was tied to a bed for five days, forced to urinate and defecate on himself.
Plaintiff inmates in class action lawsuits claimed abusive conditions in supermaximum
security prisons in Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, and Virginia. A lawsuit
filed on behalf of Connecticut inmates housed at Virginia’s Wallens Ridge State
Prison alleged that excessive force was endemic. According to the inmates’ lawyer,
prison records revealed that guards shocked the Connecticut prisoners with stun
weapons thirty-three times, and placed them in five point restraints seventy-nine
times over a nineteen month period. In a one-year period, thirty-seven Connecticut
inmates were hit when guards fired rubber rounds. In Wisconsin, inmates filed
a suit challenging conditions in that state’s two-year-old ultra-high security prison
in Boscobel—including round the clock confinement for all but a few hours a week
in small windowless cells, exercise limited to solitary activity in tiny, unheated
rooms without exercise equipment, and twenty-four-hour video surveillance that
allowed female guards to watch male inmates shower and urinate. In the most
restrictive level of the prison, personal possessions for inmates were limited to one
religious text, one box of legal materials, and twenty-five personal letters. Inmates
were not permitted to possess clocks, radios, watches, cassette players, or televisions,
were subject to extreme seasonal temperature fluctuations, and had to conduct
visits other than with lawyers through video screens. They had little natural
light and no access to the outdoors.Those confined at the Boscobel prison included
eight inmates aged under eighteen. Plaintiffs claimed that the conditions of social
isolation, idleness, and limited sensory stimulus aggravated the symptoms of mentally
ill inmates. In October, a federal judge ordered the Wisconsin Department of
Corrections to remove five seriously mentally ill inmates from the prison, to
arrange for an independent psychiatric examination of all inmates with certain
characteristics suggesting mental illness, and to remove from the prison any inmate
revealed to be seriously mentally ill. The Department of Corrections said that it
would not appeal this order.
Mental health claims were also part of a lawsuit filed by inmates at Ohio’s supermax
prison, a facility that confines only 1 percent of the state’s inmate population
but which in a two year period had three suicides, accounting for 15 percent of all
suicides in the state’s prison system.
In recent years,many states enacted laws criminalizing custodial sexual misconduct
and corrections departments adopted programs to address this abuse. But the
problem remained widespread, and investigation and prosecution of such cases
was frequently hampered by lack of commitment or resources. In Alaska, a jury
awarded nearly $1.4 million to five women in a civil action arising from their being
sexually assaulted by a guard. In Indiana, a woman who cooperated with the
authorities after serving her sentence, was subsequently prosecuted for prostitution
because she acknowledged during her testimony that a corrections official had
given her cigarettes even as he engaged in custodial sexual misconduct. Such
response violated the spirit of the law on custodial sexual misconduct that explicitly
excluded consent as a defense and was likely to deter women from reporting
sexual misconduct.
POLICE BRUTALITY
There were thousands of allegations of police abuse, including excessive use of
force, such as unjustified shootings, beatings, fatal chokings, and rough treatment,
but overwhelming barriers to accountability remained, enabling officers responsible
for human rights violations to escape due punishment.Victims seeking redress
faced obstacles that ranged from overt intimidation to the reluctance of local and
federal prosecutors to take on police brutality cases. During fiscal year 2000,
approximately 12,000 civil rights complaints, most alleging police abuse,were submitted
to the U.S. Department of Justice, but over the same period just fifty-four
officers were either convicted or pled guilty to crimes under the civil rights statute
stemming from complaints during 2000 and previous years.
In April, a white police officer, Stephen Roach, shot dead an unarmed black man
wanted on misdemeanor warrants in Cincinnati, Ohio. The response to the shooting
of Timothy Thomas revealed deep distrust of the police among some in
Cincinnati, leading to protests and rioting. Police made hundreds of arrests and
dozens of people were injured in three days of violence and property damage.
In September, Roach was acquitted by the county judge, in a non-jury trial that
he requested, on misdemeanor charges in relation to the Thomas shooting. In
another case, after a jury deadlocked, county prosecutors in Ohio simply dropped
charges of involuntary manslaughter against another police officer arising from the
asphyxiation death of suspect Roger Owensby, while another officer was acquitted
of assault charges in the same case. Prosecutors announced they would not pursue
charges against Cincinnati officers who fired beanbag projectiles against persons
attending the Thomas funeral.
In October, the Justice Department issued a preliminary findings letter stemming
from its inquiry into police policies and practices in Cincinnati. It called for
sweeping changes to the police department’s policies on the use of force, training of
officers in appropriate use of force, and in its record-keeping and mechanisms for
investigating allegations of police abuse.
In November 2000, the Los Angeles City Council approved the consent decree
negotiated between the Justice Department and city officials following the Justice Department’s inquiry into police policies and practices in the city. In June 2001, a
federal judge approved the agreement, making Los Angeles’s police department
only the third city force to be required to operate under a federal consent decree following
Justice Department “pattern or practice” civil rights inquiries. (Police forces
in Steubenville, Ohio and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania operated under similar consent
decrees, as did the New Jersey State Police.) The decree established an outside monitor
to ensure that the department collects data on the race of people subjected to
vehicle and pedestrian stops and implements a computerized system for tracking
complaints, disciplinary actions, and other data regarding officers’ performance,
among other reform requirements.
In New York City, however, it was reported in May 2001 that a Justice Department
“pattern or practice” inquiry into the use of excessive force that began after
the August 1997 assault on Abner Louima was dropped by the Justice Department,
while a separate inquiry into alleged racial profiling by the department’s force
stalled. Information about progress in approximately fifteen other pending
inquiries into other police departments’ policies and practices was not made public.
In the District of Columbia, city officials and the Justice Department came to an
agreement to make reforms in the city’s police department after the police chief
requested the Justice Department’s assistance in dealing with officers’ use of excessive
force and the department’s poor accountability systems.
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued its first report reviewing U.S. compliance with the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD). The committee commended
the “detailed, frank and comprehensive”U.S. compliance report despite its
being submitted five years late, and noted U.S. progress in some areas in addressing
racial discrimination and the extensive constitutional and legislative framework for
the protection of civil rights.
The committee also expressed many concerns about continuing racial discrimination
and the U.S. failure to live up to key provisions of CERD, noting that the
U.S. had failed to implement the treaty and had too limited an understanding of the
scope of the treaty’s protections. In particular, the committee pointed to the obligation
on the U.S. to prohibit racial discrimination in all its forms, including practices
and legislation that, while not discriminatory by intent, may be so in effect.
The committee recommended that the U.S. review existing laws and policies to
ensure effective protection against discrimination and the elimination of any
unjustifiable disparate impact, as required by CERD.
Other areas of concern highlighted by the committee included police brutality,
notably against minority groups and foreigners; disproportionately high incarceration
rates of African-Americans and Hispanics and the need to ensure equal
treatment in the criminal justice system; racial disparities in the application in the
death penalty; felony disenfranchisement, particularly affecting minorities after
they have served criminal sentences; treatment of indigenous peoples; and racial
discrimination and disparities in housing, employment, education, and health care. The committee also noted that officials at the federal, state, and local level
failed to collect statistics necessary to determine the extent of discrimination and
official response to it.
Responding to questions put by the committee,U.S. officials failed to accept the
scope and obligations of CERD: they repeated the contention that intentional discrimination
is prohibited by U.S. law, while ignoring the disparate impact provisions
of CERD. For example, the written response of the U.S. to the committee’s
questions, dismissed concerns about disparate incarceration rates by pointing to
various causes for those disparities but without offering any clear plan to comply
with the treaty’s provisions regarding disparate impact.
The U.S. response also stated that there was no need to enact legislation to
implement CERD domestically, arguing that U.S. law was already in compliance
with its provisions. It acknowledged that the U.S. had no centralized data system for
recording complaints of racial discrimination at the local, state, or federal levels,
and at the same time insisted that there was no pervasive discrimination problem
without providing any data to support this contention.
In September, the U.S. abruptly and publicly withdrew its delegation from the
United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR) in Durban, South Africa, citing concern
about references to Zionism in draft documents before the conference.However, it
was clear that the Bush administration also felt serious unease about calls made
within the WCAR context for reparations for slavery and other forms of severe
racial discrimination in the United States.The administration had already signaled
its lack of support for the conference through its failure to contribute significant
funding or to identify goals it hoped to achieve other than preventing examination
of past practices in the U.S. By not participating, the administration missed an
important opportunity to review both the positive and negative aspects of its
record on racial discrimination and plans to address continuing shortcomings.
Many U.S. nongovernmental civil rights groups attended the WCAR, however, and
contributed to its declaration and program of action to intensify the struggle
against racial, ethnic, and other forms of discrimination.
HATE CRIMES
Following the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, private individuals
committed xenophobic acts of harassment and aggression against Muslims,
Sikhs, and people ofMiddle Eastern and South Asian descent. By November,monitoring
groups around the country had received almost 1,000 complaints alleging
crimes apparently motivated by bias and hate, including four murders. Violent
assaults, death threats, shootings, and vandalism at mosques and Sikh temples were
reported; at several U.S. universities foreign students from the Middle East and
South Asia were attacked; and members of the affected communities feared to leave
their homes, go to work, or wear traditional clothing in public for fear of attack.
Investigations into, and prosecutions of, those responsible for various attacks
against members of the affected minority groups were pending in November.
The initial response of key political leaders was commendable. President Bush, Attorney General Ashcroft,New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, and other officials
urged the public to reject national or religious stereotyping that would blame
whole communities for the acts of terrorism committed by a few, simply because
they shared the same religious, ethnic, or national identity.
IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The anti-immigration sentiment that led to the enactment of the stringent 1996
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act seemed to have
weakened prior to the September 11 attacks. Many public figures commented
favorably on the contribution of immigrants to U.S. economic and cultural life, and
President Bush announced that he would seek to regularize the status of the more
than three million undocumented Mexican workers residing in the U.S.
Immigrants’ activists gained ground not only in the political arena but also
before the U.S. Supreme Court. In June, the country’s highest court ruled that the
government could not continue to imprison deportable immigrants whose home
countries either would not accept them or no longer existed: the decision most
immediately affected more than 3,400 non-citizens then subject to indefinite
detention by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). Supreme Court
Justice Stephen Breyer, for the majority, wrote: “Freedom from imprisonment—
from government custody, detention, or other forms of physical restraint—lies at
the heart of the liberty that [the constitution] protects. The serious constitutional
problem arising out of a statute that, in these circumstances, permits an indefinite,
perhaps permanent, deprivation of human liberty without any such protection is
obvious.”
In June, the Supreme Court also issued a ruling that affirmed the right of legal
immigrants to have their cases reviewed by a court before facing deportation. The
court also ruled that immigration laws passed in 1996—making deportation automatic
for an expanded group of immigrants—could not be applied retroactively.
Detention practices following the September 11 attacks were especially troubling.
As noted, law enforcement officials detained at least 1,100 people in connection
with the investigation into the September attack. In late November, the
government announced that 104 were being held on federal criminal charges and
548 were being held on immigration charges.While it released the names of persons
charged with federal crimes, it continued its refusal to release the names,
places of detention, or specific violations of those held on immigration charges.
Human Rights Watch and other U.S.-based civil and human rights group filed a
Freedom of Information Act request in October to seek information about the
detainees.Human Rights Watch also sought direct access to detainees in custody in
relation to the investigation of the September 11 attacks. By late November, INS
officials had denied the Human Rights Watch request to visit one New Jersey jail
holding INS detainees and authorities had failed to respond to other, similar
requests for access at other facilities.
Some attorneys representing detainees reported difficulty in locating and advising
their clients; others said that the authorities did not properly advise their clients of their rights. It took days for some families to find out where their detained relatives
were being held.
In recent years, the number of people in INS detention has grown dramatically
to an average nationally of 22,000 per day, compared to 6,700 per day in 1995. This
increasing population continued to seriously impact the capacity of the INS to provide
humane and safe detention conditions, and a lack of adequate space in federal
facilities caused the INS to disperse some detainees to local jails. In 2001,more than
half of all INS detainees were held in prisons or local jails intended for criminal
inmates, exposing them to treatment and conditions inappropriate to their administrative
detainee status and hampering their access to legal assistance. Asylumseekers,
who by conservative estimates made up at least 5 percent of the detainee
population, continued to be detained as the rule, not the exception, in breach of
international standards relating to the treatment of asylum-seekers. In its own
facilities, the INS implemented some standards regarding treatment and conditions,
but INS detainees assigned to jails were under the direct control of jail officials
and INS monitoring of such jails was minimal.
The INS continued to detain unaccompanied children for lengthy periods
before releasing them to family members or appropriate guardians, and acknowledged
that it held about 5,000 children in its custody annually. Rights groups criticized
the INS for denying full access to independent monitors and lawyers who
represented the detained children in a successful class-action lawsuit challenging
the conditions of confinement for youth in INS custody. In a positive development,
Senator Dianne Feinstein proposed legislation that would correct these and other
abusive conditions for unaccompanied children in the United States.
The 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act’s
expedited removal proceedings, intended to process and deport individuals who
enter the United States without valid documents with minimum delay, imperiled
genuine asylum seekers and resulted in immigrants being detained in increasing
numbers. Asylum seekers with questionable documents were sent to “secondary
inspection”where they had to convey their fears regarding return to their country
of origin. The expedited process was characterized by excessive secrecy, making it
virtually impossible to monitor the fairness of INS officials’ decisions at each stage
of the initial review.
The September 11 attacks sparked several legislative proposals to tighten control
of U.S. borders by employing more Border Patrol agents, whose number had
already increased rapidly to over 9,000,more than double the 1993 total.This rapid
increase raised concern that serious oversight deficiencies that have affected the
Border Patrol, particularly its capacity to investigate complaints of abuse by Border
Patrol agents, would become more acute. As in previous years, in 2001, Border
Patrol agents shot a number of border-crossers in questionable circumstances, in
some cases fatally wounding them. Agents, who were not required to wear protective
gear although this would reduce their risk of injury, said they shot migrants
who they feared were about to throw rocks at them.
Migrants who sought to enter the U.S. illegally by crossing the border with Mexico
continued to die of exposure or drowning in high numbers. In the first half of
2001, 188 perished; in 2000, 499 died. In 1996, the first year for which there was comprehensive data, there were eighty-seven deaths.As a result of the current INS
strategy of concentrating border control in urban centers, many migrants opted to
cross the border at remote locations that required them to traverse particularly hazardous
desert terrain and to depend on smugglers.Many also crossed through private
ranches, to which local ranchers responded by carrying out armed patrols
along the border, in some cases beyond their own property, and organizing volunteer-
based “missions” to hold border crossers. This resulted in the death or injury
of several migrants at the hands of ranchers, and an inadequate response by the
authorities to abuses committed against migrants by ranchers. In August, a rancher
charged in connection with the death of a Mexican border crosser who had entered
his property a year before to ask for water, but whom he shot dead, was convicted
on a misdemeanor deadly conduct charge, given a 180-day suspended sentence and
fined $4,000.
DEATH PENALTY
By November, the U.S. had carried out sixty-two executions since the beginning
of 2001 (compared to a total of eighty-five in the whole of 2000) and 3,717 men and
women were on death row. In Texas, the authorities carried out fifteen executions
compared to forty in 2000, and Virginia executed two prisoners compared to eight
in the same period of 2000.Against this trend, Oklahoma executed sixteen inmates,
a record number for the state.
Public confidence in the fairness and reliability of the death penalty continued
to erode, despite strong support for the June 11 execution of Timothy McVeigh,
convicted of the 1995 bombing of the Oklahoma City federal center that killed 168
people. Polls showed support for the death penalty fell to its lowest point in years—
63 percent—and dropped even further to 46 percent—when life in prison was
offered as an option. Flaws in the death penalty process were highlighted by the revelation,
five days before McVeigh was originally scheduled to be executed, that in
one of the most prominent cases of the decade, the FBI had failed to turn over thousands
of pages of documents to McVeigh’s lawyers, forcing the U.S.Department of
Justice to delay his execution for a month.
The mishandling of the McVeigh case, the first federal execution since 1963,
exemplified the fallibility of the capital punishment process that continued to be
documented in reports from around the country of judicial error, false testimony,
incompetent defense lawyers, and poor laboratory work in capital cases. In May,
following an Oklahoma City Police Department report on multiple errors by local
police chemist Joyce Gilchrist, the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation
launched an investigation into all the cases—including twenty-three capital
cases—in which she had been involved. Oklahoma death row inmate Alfred Brian
Mitchell’s death sentence was overturned because of what the court called
Gilchrist’s “untrue” testimony.
Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, long considered a supporter of
the death penalty, publicly expressed her concern that “the system may well be
allowing some innocent defendants to be executed. “ She cited statistics showing that defendants in Texas who were represented by court-appointed counsel, were
far more likely to be convicted and to receive a death sentence than those who
retained their own attorneys. By September, five men had been exonerated and
released in 2001 after years on death row, bringing the total of innocent persons
released from death row since 1973 to ninety-eight.
The fairness of the federal death penalty system, particularly in relation to racial
and geographic disparities, was also called into question. A September 2000 report
issued by the Justice Department documented stark racial and geographic disparities
in the prosecution of federal capital cases, leading President Bill Clinton to issue
a temporary reprieve for Juan Raul Garza,who faced execution in December 2000.
In June 2001, the Justice Department issued a supplemental report concluding
that there was no evidence that minority defendants were subjected to bias in federal
capital cases. That conclusion was not supported by the data in the report,
which acknowledged the impossibility of acquiring the necessary data during the
review period allowed. The June report, however, did put forward several explanations
for the disproportionate number of minorities on death row, though none of
these appeared adequate when closely examined by Human Rights Watch and
others. Acknowledging the shortcomings of the June report, the Justice Department
stated that it would undertake a comprehensive study of racial and geographic
disparities in the application of the federal death penalty, but by November
the report had not been released.
The June report concluded that there was no racial inequity in the administration
of the federal death penalty because there was no evidence of discriminatory
intent or actual bias on the part of prosecutors.Under the CERD, however, the U.S.
is obligated to prohibit practices that have either the purpose or effect of discriminating
on the basis of race. Commenting in its August report on the U.S., the U.N.
committee observed: “there is a disturbing correlation between race, both of the
victim and the defendant, and the imposition of the death penalty.”
The continued use of the death penalty by U.S. federal and state authorities was
strongly criticized by European countries, notably European Union (E.U.) states, as
inconsistent with human rights principles. In April, as in previous years, the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution sponsored by the E.U. that
urged the U.S. to move toward abolition of the death penalty, and called particularly
for the U.S. to cease executing juvenile offenders and prisoners with any form
of mental disorder. In June, the Council of Europe voted to remove the observer status
of the U.S. and Japan if they did not end their use of the death penalty by January
1, 2003. Prominent former U.S. diplomats also spoke out on the issue in the
press and in a court brief, stating that the U.S. executions of prisoners with mental
retardation hampered U.S. diplomatic relations and damaged the country’s reputation
as a leader in human rights and its foreign policy interests.
In June, the World Court ruled that the U.S. had violated the Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations in the case of two German nationals executed by the state of
Arizona in 1999. Karl and Walter LaGrand had not been informed of their right
under the Vienna Convention to seek assistance from the German consulate;
Amnesty International reported that fifteen other foreign nationals executed in the
U.S. since 1993 had also not been informed of their consular rights. In June, Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating granted a thirty-day reprieve to a Mexican national,
Gerardo Valdez,who had not been told of his right to contact his consulate. In September,
the state’s highest court granted Valdez an indefinite stay of execution. As
of November 2001, 119 foreign nationals remained on death row.
In March,Human Rights Watch reported that at least thirty-five men with mental
retardation had been executed in the U.S. since 1976, even though their mental
impairment limited their moral culpability and harmed their ability to protect their
legal rights.Mounting domestic and international criticism of executing the mentally
retarded spurred five states to enact legislation this year prohibiting such executions.
In Texas, where at least six prisoners with mental retardation have been
executed, and where others remained on death row, the legislature passed a similar
bill, only for Governor Rick Perry to veto it. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the
appeal of North Carolina death row inmate Ernest McCarver,who sought to obtain
a ruling that the U.S. constitution prohibited the execution of prisoners with mental
retardation as “cruel and unusual” punishment, and then agreed to substitute
the case of Daryl Atkins, a Virginia death row inmate, when McCarver benefited
from North Carolina’s enactment of legislation barring the execution of prisoners
with mental retardation. Previously, in 1989 the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S.
constitution did not bar the execution of prisoners with mental retardation, noting
the absence of a national consensus against such executions.At that time, only two
states prohibited such executions, but that number had increased by November
2001 to eighteen states, as well as the federal government, while a further twelve
permitted no executions at all. The Atkins case was awaiting consideration by the
Supreme Court in November 2001. In June, the Supreme Court overturned the
death sentence of Johnny Paul Penry, because the sentencing instructions that the
trial court gave to the jury did not permit it to give due consideration to his mental
abilities.
Prompted by a request from Human Rights Watch, the McAlester Regional
Health Center decided to cease providing the Oklahoma Department of Corrections
with the drugs used in lethal injections. The health center agreed that assisting
the state in the implementation of the death penalty was inconsistent with its
mission as a hospital.
The United States was virtually alone in imposing sentences of death on those
who were children at the time of the crimes for which they were convicted. Eightyfive
juvenile offenders were on death rows in fifteen U.S. states as of July 1, 2001.
With thirty-one juvenile offenders on its death row, Texas accounted for over onethird
of the national total. In all, twenty-three U.S. states continued to allow the
death penalty to be imposed for crimes committed by those below the age of eighteen.
Two juvenile offenders received last-minute stays of execution after their attorneys
presented new evidence or raised constitutional issues on appeal. On August
15,Napoleon Beazley, convicted in Texas for a murder he committed at age seventeen,
came within hours of execution when the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals
issued a stay to enable it to consider whether his first appellate attorney provided
ineffective assistance. Earlier, in March, Missouri death row inmate Antonio
Richardson received a stay from the U.S. Supreme Court. Sixteen at the time of his crime, Richardson may have mental retardation; his case was on hold pending the
Supreme Court ruling on the constitutionality of imposing the death sentence on
persons with mental retardation.
LABOR RIGHTS
There were continuing labor rights violations affecting workers in many sectors.
One particularly vulnerable group was the more than 4,000 migrant domestic
workers with special temporary visas. These special visas, termed A-3, G-5, and B-
1, allowed migrant domestic workers, most of whom were women, to work for
U.S.-based foreign diplomats and officials of international organizations, as well as
for other foreigners temporarily in the United States and U.S. citizens who resided
abroad but were temporarily in the United States. In a report published in June
2001, Human Rights Watch detailed how these special visa programs were conducive
to and facilitated violations of the workers’ human rights.
In the worst cases, domestic workers were victims of trafficking—deceived
about the conditions of their employment, brought to the United States, and held
in servitude or performing forced labor. They worked excessive hours for wages
significantly below the statutory minimum, were rarely allowed to leave their
employers’ premises, and were subject to psychological, physical, and sometimes
sexual abuse. As their visas were employer-based, however, workers who left their
employer even to escape abuse lost their legal immigration status in the U.S. If,
alternatively, a worker lodged a legal complaint, it was unlikely that her rights
would be protected as none of the relevant authorities—the Department of State,
the INS and the Department of Labor-monitored employer treatment of these
workers or kept effective records on them and their employers. Also, there was no
guarantee that the INS would allow a complainant to remain in the U.S. to seek legal
redress or that her rights would be protected under U.S. law, as live-in domestic
workers were excluded from important U.S. labor legislation. This included the
overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standard Act, the National Labor Relations
Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, and, in practice, Title VII protections
against sexual harassment in the workplace.
GAY AND LESBIAN RIGHTS
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in many U.S. schools were another
vulnerable group whose rights were violated. They were harassed and targeted for
violence by their peers, including physical attack, mock rape, unwelcome sexual
advances, taunts, obscene notes or graffiti, and the destruction of personal property.
Adding to the problem, as Human Rights Watch showed in a report based on
research in seven states that it published in May, school officials and teachers often
failed to intervene to stop the harassment or to hold the abusive students accountable,
and, in the worst cases, participated in acts of harassment. Teachers who were
lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender were themselves reluctant to openly acknowledge their sexual orientation at school for fear of losing their jobs.The problem was
further exacerbated by the failure of federal, state, and local authorities to enact
laws expressly protecting students from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation
or gender. The discrimination, harassment, and violence inflicted on students
interfered with their right to obtain an education.The emotional impact may
have been a factor contributing to the disproportionately high incidence of alcohol
abuse and drug addiction as well as suicide attempts among lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender youth.
Anti-gay harassment was also pervasive in the military. Seven years after the
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy was codified as law and implemented, the military’s
own surveys and investigations found that training on how to implement the law
was deficient and that anti-gay harassment remained widespread. Many military
personnel who faced verbal or physical harassment and feared for their safety made
statements declaring that they were gay, knowing that it would mean the end of
their careers but also that if they complained officially about anti-gay harassment
they would probably face an intrusive inquiry and discharge. Harassers, however,
were rarely punished.
Although the “Don’t Ask,Don’t Tell”policy was ostensibly intended to allow gay,
lesbian, and bisexual service members to remain in the military, discharges
increased significantly after the policy’s adoption. From 1994 to 2000, more than
6,500 servicemembers were discharged under the policy, with a record number of
1,231 separations during 2000. Women were discharged at a disproportionately
high rate,while the policy provided an additional means for men to harass women
servicemembers by threatening to “out”those who refused their advances or threatened
to report them, thus ending their careers.
The U.S. was increasingly out of step internationally in maintaining restrictions
on homosexuals serving in the military.Most of its North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and other allies either allowed homosexuals to serve openly or had
no policy on the issue. In September 1999, the European Court of Human Rights
rejected a United Kingdom ban on homosexuals serving in the military—the ban’s
justifications were nearly identical to those used to support the “Don’t Ask, Don’t
Tell” policy.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Hidden in the Home: Abuse of Domestic Workers with Special Visas in the United
States, 6/01
Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,Gay, Bisexual,
and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Beyond Reason: The Death Penalty and Offenders with Mental Retardation, 3/01