United States
Bush administration resistance to scrutiny of its counterterrorism policies and
past abuses continues to be a major obstacle to human rights improvement in
the United States. Despite some efforts in Congress to change practices violating
basic human rights, there was no evident progress concerning the treatment of
so-called enemy combatants, including those held at Guantánamo Bay, or the
use of secret detention facilities.
Domestically, undocumented migrant workers faced an increased risk of detention,
and other non-citizens were blocked from vindicating their rights in court.
Persons convicted of crimes faced harsh sentencing policies and in some cases
abusive conditions in US prisons.
Racial discrimination again emerged as a prominent issue in 2007, when six
African-American high school students in Jena, Louisiana, were charged as adults
with a range of serious crimes for the 2006 beating of a white student. The case
sparked protests and the charges were widely viewed as excessive and discriminatory,
especially as compared with the treatment of white Jena youths involved
in other incidents.
Guantanamo Bay, Indefinite Detention, and Military
Commissions
The Department of Defense released over 100 detainees from Guantanamo Bay in
2007, but about 305 remained at this writing. Most of these men have been held
without charge for six years. Over a dozen Chinese Uighurs, and likely several
more individuals of other nationalities, were long ago cleared for release yet
remain incarcerated at Guantanamo. The government acknowledges the Uighurs
likely would be ill-treated if returned to China.
In other cases, the United States, in violation of its international obligations, has
repatriated detainees without any meaningful or independent assessment of the
risk of torture or abuse they faced upon return. In such cases the US has claimed
that “diplomatic assurances”—or promises of humane treatment—from the receiving government were sufficient protection against abuse, despite compelling
evidence to the contrary.
In December 2005 Congress passed the Detainee Treatment Act, preventing
Guantanamo detainees from bringing future habeas corpus petitions to challenge
the lawfulness of their detention or any mistreatment. In September 2006 the
Military Commissions Act made these provisions retroactive and extended them
to all detained non-citizen “unlawful enemy combatants.” After the November
2006 congressional elections, legislation that would have lifted the habeas-stripping
provisions passed the Senate, but fell short of the 60 votes needed to overcome
a filibuster. The Supreme Court agreed to review the constitutionality of the
habeas-stripping provisions, with a decision expected by mid-2008.
In June a federal appellate court ruled that these same habeas-stripping provisions
could not be applied to Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri, a Qatari in the US on a
student visa, whom the US administration had declared an “enemy combatant”
just weeks before his trial for financial fraud and giving false statements. Having
already spent four years in solitary confinement in a military brig in South
Carolina, al-Marri’s only outside contact has been with his lawyers, who had to
sue in US court for access to him. The appeals court ruled that al-Marri could not
be stripped of his right to bring a habeas challenge to his detention and ordered
the government to either charge him in federal court or release him. At this writing,
the order was stayed pending appeal.
Congress authorized a new system of military commissions in 2006 after the US
Supreme Court in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld declared unlawful the military commissions
set up in 2001 by the Bush administration to try non-citizens accused of terrorism.
While these new commissions, which are entirely separate from the federal
court system, address some of the concerns of the old commissions, they still
fall far short of the due process standards provided by federal courts. For example,
statements obtained through “cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment” prior
to December 30, 2005, are admissible so long as a judge finds that they are probative
and “reliable.” The ad hoc nature of the process raises further fair trial concerns.
Australian David Hicks, whose plea agreement in March 2007 makes him the only
Guantanamo detainee to be convicted of a criminal offense, was scheduled to be
released from custody in Australia in December, upon completion of his ninemonth
sentence.
To date only three other Guantanamo detainees had been charged under the
commissions: Salim Hamdan, Omar Khadr, and Mohamed Jawad. Both Khadr and
Jawad were juveniles—15 and 17, respectively—when they were first brought to
Guantanamo close to six years ago. The Bush administration has said that it ultimately
plans to try up to 80 Guantanamo detainees before the commissions.
Jose Padilla was convicted in federal court in 2007 of conspiracy to aid terrorism,
but prosecutors did not pursue long-trumpeted allegations that he had been
planning to detonate a radioactive “dirty” bomb in Chicago. The government
agreed not to use any statements made by Padilla during his more than three
years in incommunicado military detention, presumably because such statements
were elicited during abusive interrogation.
Torture Policy
Over the past two years, Congress and the courts have repudiated the Bush
administration’s authorization of abusive interrogation techniques that amount to
torture. In response the Pentagon announced new rules applicable to all interrogations
carried out by the United States armed forces and disavowed many abusive
techniques. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), however, contends that it
is not bound by these rules, and the administration has gone to great lengths to
justify the CIA’s continued use of certain techniques banned for use by the military.
According to an October 2007 New York Times article, the Department of
Justice issued legal memoranda in 2005 that authorized the use of waterboarding
(simulated drowning), head slapping, and exposure to frigid temperatures, and
ruled that neither these techniques, nor any other techniques being employed by
the CIA, violated the then-pending legislation prohibiting cruel, inhuman, and
degrading treatment. In October 2007 the Bush administration’s candidate for
attorney general, Michael Mukasey, refused to repudiate waterboarding as a form
of torture in his confirmation hearings.
In July 2007 the administration issued an executive order providing legal authorization
for the so-called “CIA program” in which detainees are held incommunicado
and subject to reportedly abusive interrogations. Michael McConnell, Director
of National Intelligence, said on July 22, 2007 that he “would not want a US citizen
to go through the process” of being subjected to some of the techniques
approved for use by the CIA.
Secret Prisons
In April 2007 the Department of Defense announced the transfer to Guantanamo
of another detainee who was previously held in CIA custody, suggesting that
secret prisons (temporarily closed after President Bush’s admission that they
existed in 2006) were up and running again. Human Rights Watch has identified
39 other people we believe were held in secret prisons; administration officials
have indicated the total number to be about 100. Under international law those
persons remain unlawfully “disappeared” until the United States can account for
them. In July President Bush issued an executive order providing authorization for
this “CIA program,” despite the patent illegality of incommunicado detention
under international law.
Accountability for Detainee and Civilian Abuse
Despite a number of official investigations into abuse of detainees in US custody
in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Guantanamo Bay, the United States has done little to
hold those involved accountable. Prosecutions of military personnel have focused
almost exclusively on low-ranking personnel, and no one has been charged under
the doctrine of command responsibility. Over a dozen cases referred to the
Department of Justice for prosecution by the military and others have been sitting
idle for years. No CIA agents have been prosecuted for abuse, and only one civilian
contractor has faced criminal charges.
On September 16, 2007, a convoy of contractors from the Blackwater security firm
fired into a crowded street in Baghdad, killing at least 17 civilians. This incident
has galvanized international attention to the effective immunity from prosecution
under Iraqi and US law enjoyed by many of the almost 180,000 contractors supporting
US operations in Iraq. At this writing, legislation expanding federal jurisdiction over felonies committed by contractors overseas was pending before
Congress.
Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen arbitrarily arrested and transferred by the US to
Afghanistan, where he was beaten and held incommunicado for several months,
and Maher Arar, a dual Canadian-Syrian citizen secretly detained and sent by the
US to Syria, where he was tortured and imprisoned for 10 months, brought lawsuits
against the US challenging their mistreatment. US courts have dismissed
both cases, accepting the administration’s position that the courts should not
review the government’s actions. El-Masri asked the Supreme Court in 2007 to
review the dismissal of his case, but the court declined to do so.
Denial of Refugee Protection
US law allows authorities to deny refugee protection to people believed to have
associated with or provided “material support” to any armed group. The broad
terms of the law have led authorities to deny rights to persons who fit the refugee
definition under international law, including rape victims forced into domestic
servitude by rebel groups. In 2007 the administration began to issue a small
number of waivers to prevent innocent civilians from being barred as terrorists.
Over 3,000 refugees—mostly from Burma—and a handful of asylum seekers have
benefited, but implementation has been slow, the administration’s waiver authority
is limited, and families have been separated as a result. Legislation that would
expand the waiver authority was pending before Congress at this writing.
Incarceration
There are more than 2.2 million persons in US prisons and jails, an increase of
500 percent from 30 years ago. A June 2007 report by the Justice Department’s
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) found that the incarcerated population continued
to grow in 2006, experiencing its largest one-year increase in six years. The
United States now has both the largest incarcerated population and the highest
per capita incarceration rate in the world, with a rate five times that of England
and Wales, seven times that of Canada, and more than 10 times that of Japan.
The burden of incarceration falls disproportionately on members of racial and ethnic
minorities. Black men are incarcerated at 6.5 times the rate of white men, and
11.7 percent of all black males age 25 to 29 are in prison or jail. The US government
failed to explain or address these rates in its 2007 report to the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, hearings on which
are expected in February 2008.
As the prison population grows, so does the challenge of providing adequate
medical and mental health care. A September 2006 BJS report found that more
than half of all prisoners—and nearly three-quarters of all female prisoners—suffer
from a mental health problem such as major depression or a psychotic disorder.
In California a federal judge found that medical care in the state’s prisons violated
the US Constitution’s prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment. In 2006
the judge appointed a receiver to oversee prison medical care, stripping that
function from the state government. In September 2007 the receiver issued a
report finding that 15 percent of California prisoner deaths were either preventable
or possibly preventable.
Enacted by the US Congress in 1996, the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) creates
a variety of obstacles for prisoners seeking to challenge their conditions of
confinement or otherwise vindicate their rights in court. In January 2007 the US
Supreme Court issued a decision overturning some particularly restrictive interpretations
of the PLRA by lower federal courts.
The Death Penalty and Juvenile Life without Parole
State governments executed 42 prisoners between January and October 2007,
bringing the total number of men and women executed in the United States to
1099 since 1977. Almost all were killed by lethal injection; one was electrocuted.
With growing evidence that lethal injection may be a very painful way to die, executions
in many states were halted in 2007. In September 2007 the US Supreme
Court agreed to consider the constitutionality of lethal injection in the case of two
Kentucky death row prisoners claiming that lethal injection amounts to cruel and unusual punishment. Lethal injections in the US are expected to decrease substantially
until the court issues its decision sometime in 2008.
In 2007 Human Rights Watch revised upward, from 2,225 to at least 2,380, our
estimate of the number of US prisoners serving sentences of life without parole
for crimes committed when they were under 18. The number of such prisoners in
the rest of world combined is eight. Efforts at reforming this excessively punitive
sentence for young offenders continued in several states across the country,
including in Michigan and California.
Women’s Rights
Women’s rights in the United States suffered major setbacks at the Supreme
Court in 2007. One court decision severely restricted challenges to unequal pay
(women earn only 77 cents for every dollar earned by men), another upheld the
exclusion of in-home care workers from certain federal wage and overtime protections
(89 percent of such workers are women), and a third upheld a ban on a
medically approved late-term abortion method, adding to existing regulatory and
financial obstacles to safe abortion.
The US continues to channel its international assistance toward programs that
compromise sexual and reproductive health and rights. In 2007, a significant portion
of US funding for HIV/AIDS prevention continued to be earmarked for programs
that promote abstinence until marriage, regardless of whether such programs
were likely to be effective and without sufficient regard for abuses that put
women, even those who abstain until marriage, at high risk for HIV.
In a positive step, the Senate in 2007 approved a bill that would overturn the
“global gag rule”—a series of restrictions on what recipients of US reproductive
health aid can do and say on abortion. At this writing, it remained unclear
whether the bill would become law.
Jena
In August 2006 an African-American high school student in Jena, Louisiana, challenged
the de facto racial segregation of his school’s grounds by asking permission to sit under the “white tree” on campus. The next day three nooses hung
from the tree. School authorities responded inadequately, further stoking racial
tensions. In December 2006 six African-American youth at the high school beat
up a white youth, who suffered a concussion and other injuries. The six youth
were charged as adults with a range of serious crimes including attempted murder,
spurring a nationwide outcry over what were seen as excessive, racially discriminatory
charges. In September 2007 an appeals court vacated the conviction
for aggravated battery of the first of the six to be tried, Mychal Bell; the prosecutor
said he would appeal the ruling.
Sex Offenders
In a 2007 report, No Easy Answers, Human Rights Watch found that, as currently
conceived, many sex offender registry laws do little to prevent sexual violence
and violate fundamental human rights. Offenders on publicly available registries
find it difficult to obtain or keep employment and housing. Some have been murdered
and many are harassed by strangers who find their information online.
Residency restrictions lead to homelessness and transience for some convicted
sex offenders, which interfere with their effective tracking, monitoring, and supervision
by law enforcement officers; this in turn may make repeat offenses more
likely.
Sex offender laws ignore the full reality of sexual violence in the US. Child safety
advocates question the focus in current law on “stranger danger” and already
convicted offenders because more than 90 percent of child sexual abuse is committed
by someone the child knows and trusts. Authoritative studies show that
three out of four sex offenders do not re-offend within 15 years of release from
prison and 87 percent of sex crimes are committed by individuals without a previous
conviction for a sex offense.
Rights of Non-Citizens
Immigration reform legislation continued to be stymied in 2007 by disagreements
among lawmakers on whether or how to regularize the status of millions of
undocumented migrant workers. According to the US Census, there were 37.5 million
non-citizens living in the United States in 2006.
State and local governments passed at least 182 laws in 2007 limiting access to
public benefits and state-issued identification cards, or punishing landlords or
employers for doing business with undocumented workers. Many of these laws
were found unconstitutional or temporarily halted by courts. Federal immigration
authorities stepped up workplace raids in California, Nevada, New Mexico, New
York, and elsewhere, splitting many families and leading to mistaken arrests and
transfers of migrants to detention centers in remote locations far from their legal
counsel.
A 2007 Human Rights Watch report, Forced Apart, found that non-citizens who
have lived in the country for decades, including lawful permanent residents, have
been summarily deported after criminal convictions, even for minor crimes. In
fact, 64 percent of the non-citizens deported in 2005 were deported for non-violent
crimes such as drug possession or theft. The deportations occur after the
non-citizen has finished serving his or her sentence.
According to US Citizenship and Immigration Services, 672,593 non-citizens were
deported for crimes between 1997 and 2005. Human Rights Watch estimates that
at least 1.6 million spouses and children, many of whom are US citizens, were
separated from their family members as a result. US law gives immigration judges
no opportunity to balance the individual’s crime against his or her family relationships,
other connections to the United States such as military service or economic
ties, or likelihood of persecution in the country of origin.
Deportation and workplace raids are enforcement measures that US Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) authorities combine with the daily detention of
some 28,000 non-citizens. Endemic problems in detention facilities continued in
2007, including deaths in custody, inadequate medical care, inappropriate and
punitive housing for non-citizen children, interference with access to counsel and
to family members, and prolonged detention.
The death in July 2007 of Victoria Arellano, a 23-year-old transgender detainee, in
US immigration custody is an extreme, but not surprising, example of the suffering
experienced by immigration detainees with HIV/AIDS. The US fails to ensure
that detainees with HIV/AIDS receive medical care that complies with recognized
standards for correctional health care. Medical care in facilities operated or supervised by ICE is delayed, interrupted, and inconsistent to an extent that
endangers the health and lives of many detainees.
Lawsuits, congressional hearings, and proceedings before the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights have brought increased scrutiny to detention of
non-citizen children, though generally not improved conditions. In one notable
exception, lawyers in Texas won a settlement that improved conditions and
ensured the release of dozens of children.