Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s disastrous human rights record is long-standing and
changed little in 2004, with major violations of the rights to freedom of
religion, expression, association, and assembly. Uzbekistan has no independent
judiciary and torture is widespread in its pre-trial and post-conviction
facilities. In response to international pressure the government
has introduced, but not implemented, incremental reform, resulting in
no fundamental improvement. The government continues its practice of
controlling, intimidating, and arbitrarily suspending or interfering with
the work of civil society groups, the media, human rights activists and
opposition political parties.
In 2004 Uzbekistan was shaken by two episodes of violence—bombings,
and shootings in Tashkent and Bukhara in late March and early April,
and bombings of the U.S. and Israeli embassies and the General
Prosecutor’s office in Tashkent on July 30.
Uzbekistan is a key ally of the United States in the global campaign
against terrorism, but undermines that campaign by using it to justify
gross human rights abuses. Unfair trials of terror suspects in Uzbekistan
that result from gross abuses further undermine counterterrorism
efforts by producing unreliable convictions which damage rather than
promote the rule of law.
Religious Persecution
For years, the government has imprisoned on “fundamentalism”
charges individuals whose peaceful Islamic beliefs, practices, and affiliations
fell outside of strict government controls. An accumulated total of
about 7,000 people are believed to have been imprisoned since the government’s
campaign against independent Islam began in the mid-1990s.
The government justifies this campaign by referring to the “war on terror,”
failing to distinguish between those who advocate violence and those who peacefully express their religious beliefs; it used the March-
April attacks to give new validation to the campaign.
By November 1, 2004, Human Rights Watch documented 241 convictions;
the true numbers are believed to be much higher. Police use torture
and other illegal means to coerce statements and confessions from
these detainees. Courts fail to investigate torture allegations made by
defendants at trial, despite an instruction by the Supreme Court to
judges to exclude any evidence obtained under illegal means, and routinely
sentence defendants to long prison terms based solely or predominantly
on such testimony.
Conditions in Uzbekistan’s prisons are poor, and religious and political
prisoners suffer particularly harsh treatment. According to testimony by
relatives, prisoners are forced to sign statements begging President
Islam Karimov for forgiveness, renouncing their faith, and incriminating
themselves as terrorists. Prisoners who refuse are punished with
beatings, time in punishment cells, and even new criminal prosecutions.
Terrorism Trials
Approximately one hundred people were tried on terrorism, murder,
and other charges relating to the March-April 2004 violence. Trials
monitored by Human Rights Watch and other observers failed to meet
international fair trial standards. Many defendants denied any knowledge
of or involvement in the violence and alleged that police had held
them incommunicado and used torture, threats, and other pressure to
coerce confessions during the investigation. Bakhtior Muminov, tried in
October along with four others for alleged participation in the March-
April violence and alleged membership Hizb ut-Tahrir (a non-violent
religious organization that is banned in Uzbekistan) had been held
incommunicado from his arrest in late March to August. At trial he testified
that he had been tortured with beatings and electric shocks to
coerce a confession. The judge failed to launch any inquiry into Muminov’s or other defendants’ torture allegations and sentenced him
to sixteen years’ imprisonment.
Torture
The government has made no visible progress on ending the use of torture
in practice and only minimal progress on implementing the recommendations
made by the United Nations (U.N.) Special Rapporteur on
Torture after his visit to Uzbekistan in 2002. The Supreme Court issued
an instruction to judges to exclude defendants’ testimony and confessions
extracted under torture. In practice, however, judges do not
implement this instruction. Although the government states that it has
prosecuted law enforcement officers for torture and other illegal methods,
Human Rights Watch has received no response to its request for
further information about theses cases. Judges routinely accept as evidence
testimony and confessions in cases where torture is alleged as well
as base convictions solely on confessions made by defendants during the
investigation. Human Rights Watch continued to receive credible allegations
of torture in investigations and pre-trial custody as well as in
prisons.
Crackdown on Civil Society
The government tightened its grip on civil society in 2004 by extending
to international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) many of the
repressive tactics it has used against local NGOs. In 2004 it introduced
burdensome new registration and reporting procedures requiring international
NGOs to obtain “agreement” from the Ministry of Justice
(MOJ) on the content, agenda, timing and place of any activity, and to
invite MOJ officials to attend. The government closed the Open
Society Institute, which provided vital support for civil society groups,
and suspended the activities of the local affiliate of the media-support
organization Internews for six-months for alleged minor administrative violations. It also forced all women’s NGOs to undergo re-registration
procedures.
The government refused to register any independent human rights
organizations in 2004. Throughout the year, the government harassed,
threatened, and detained human rights defenders in an attempt to
restrict information on human rights abuses. At least two activists were
severely beaten by unknown assailants after receiving threats from the
government to stop their activities. On February 16, authorities arrested
defender Muidinjon Kurbanov and held him incommunicado for three
days, during which they threatened and forced him to sign a dictated
confession. He was tried and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment on
fabricated charges of weapons possession in an unfair trial that focused
on his human rights work. The sentence was reduced to a fine on
appeal and after international outcry.
Uzbek authorities continue to harass, detain, and hold under effective
house arrest activists who attempted to stage demonstrations. For example,
in June authorities prevented Bahodir Choriev, a farmer trying to
prevent government confiscation of his farm, from holding a demonstration
by holding him and his relatives in their apartment. Police
forced Choriev and eighteen of his relatives onto a bus and drove them
outside Tashkent where they interrogated them and confiscated their
passports.
Elections
There are no genuine opposition parties registered in Uzbekistan. The
government refused to register opposition political parties in advance of
the December 26 parliamentary elections. The Birlik (Unity) party
applied for registration several times, each time denied by the MOJ,
most recently in January 2004, when the MOJ claimed that the party’s
signature lists were flawed. On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that
the court had no jurisdiction to review registration decisions. Although the law allows unaffiliated candidates to run through initiative groups,
in practice, independent candidates faced intimidation, harassment, and
other serious obstacles obtaining registration and few ultimately ran.
The government also refused to allow independent observers to observe
at polling stations. Citing serious flaws in Uzbekistan’s election laws, the
lack of registered opposition parties and restrictions on freedom of the
press, the Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR) of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) refused to send a full election observation mission to
Uzbekistan.
Key International Actors
In July, the U.S. State Department determined that Uzbekistan had
failed to make sufficient progress on its human rights commitments as
outlined in the U.S.-Uzbek Bilateral Agreement and therefore did not
qualify for direct government assistance, cutting U.S. $18 million in aid.
However, in August, the Department of Defense undermined the principled
message this decision sent by pledging U.S. $21 million in new
military aid. The U.S. continues to regard Uzbekistan as an important
partner in the war on terror.
The E.U.-Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Council met in
January 2004 to discuss implementation of the Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA). The PCA requires that partner states
guarantee basic civil and political rights. The E.U. missed the opportunity
to obtain a commitment from the Uzbek government to implement
specific reforms and prematurely gave the Uzbek government credit for
progress on torture and civil society liberalization, when such progress
had not been made.
In March 2004, following the expiration of the one-year deadline it had
set for the Uzbek government to meet specific human rights benchmarks
as a condition for further engagement, the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) took
the unprecedented decision to suspend direct assistance to the government
of Uzbekistan, citing the government’s failure to make progress
on the benchmarks. It decided to limit investment to the private sector
and stay involved in public sector projects only to the extent that they
directly affect the well-being of the general population, or involve
neighboring countries.
The benchmarks had been set in the bank’s March 2003 country strategy
for Uzbekistan, issued less than two months before it held its annual
meeting in Tashkent. They pertain specifically to human rights: greater
political openness and freedom of the media; registration and free functioning
of independent civil society groups; and implementation of the
recommendations issued by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on torture.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission voted to impose a confidential
monitoring mechanism on Uzbekistan due to persistent lack of
improvement in its human rights record. In October 2004, an independent
expert appointed by the Commission visited Uzbekistan to
conduct a human rights assessment. He will present his findings in a
confidential report at the next meeting of the Commission.