Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains atrocious, with no meaningful
improvements in 2012. Torture is endemic in the criminal justice system.
Authorities intensified their crackdown on civil society activists, opposition
members, and journalists, and continued to persecute religious believers who
worship outside strict state controls.
Freedom of expression is severely limited. The government continues to sponsor
forced child labor during the cotton harvest. Authorities still deny justice for the
2005 Andijan massacre, in which government forces shot and killed hundreds of
protesters, most of them unarmed. 2012 marked 10 years since Uzbekistan
allowed a United Nations special rapporteur to visit the country.
Despite the government’s persistent refusal to address concerns about its
abysmal human rights record, the United States and European Union continued
to advance closer relations with Tashkent in 2012, seeking cooperation with the
war in Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Authorities regularly threaten, imprison, and torture rights defenders and civil
society activists, and block international rights groups and media outlets from
operating in Uzbekistan.
In 2012, the Uzbek government continued to hold at least 10 rights defenders in
prison on wrongful charges, and has brought charges against others because of
their human rights work. The 10 are: Solijon Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov,
Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov, Rasul Khudainasarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov,
Yuldash Rasulov, Dilmurod Saidov, Akzam Turgunov, and Gulnaza Yuldasheva.
Yuldasheva was sentenced in July to seven years on trumped-up fraud charges
for investigating police involvement in human trafficking. Another activist,
Jamshid Karimov, was reportedly released from a psychiatric ward in 2011 but
has “disappeared,” prompting fears he was re-detained. Several imprisoned
activists are in serious ill-health and have been tortured in prison.
Other journalists and opposition figures remain imprisoned on politically motivated
charges. In January, days before his 13-year sentence was to expire,
Muhammad Bekjanov, editor of the opposition newspaper Erk, was given an
additional five-year sentence for allegedly violating prison rules. Bekjanov has
been jailed since 1999, and along with another jailed journalist, Yusuf
Ruzimuradov, has been imprisoned longer than any other reporter worldwide,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
On February 8, the government-controlled bar association upheld a ruling to disbar
one of Uzbekistan’s leading defense lawyers, Ruhiddin Komilov.
In separate incidents in March, authorities deported two foreign reporters, the
BBC’s Natalia Antelava and Viktoriya Ivleva of Russia’s Novaya Gazeta newspaper,
when they arrived at Tashkent airport.
On March 26, journalist Viktor Krymzalov was convicted of defamation for an
article published without a byline. The plaintiff “assumed” the article was written
by Krymzalov, who denied he was the author.
On April 6, a Tashkent court fined journalist Elena Bondar US$3,700 on charges
of “propagat[ing] ethnic or religious hatred” in connection with research she
conducted on the pending closure of a university. Bondar and other journalists
believed that the charges, devoid of any substance, were leveled in response to
her record of independent reporting for news outlets whose websites are systematically
blocked by authorities, such as the independent news portal
www.ferghana.ru.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance, an Uzbek rights group, were regularly
subjected to arbitrary detention and house arrest in 2012. On February 28,
activist Abdullo Tojiboi-ugli went to Tashkent’s City Hall to picket authorities.
Police detained him minutes after he began. He was sentenced for “minor hooliganism”
and fined 70 times the minimum wage.
On March 2, the 20th anniversary of Uzbekistan’s accession to the UN, Elena
Urlaeva, head of the Human Rights Alliance; Tojiboi-ugli; and activists Shukhrat
Rustamov, Nasiba Ashirmatova, Ada Kim, Gulchekhra Turopova, and Zoya
Yangurazova planned to march to the residence of President Islam Karimov.
Police placed them under house arrest as they gathered in Urlaeva’s home.
Urlaeva and Tojiboi-ugli were able to leave but were later detained and released
several hours later.
On May 5, activist Gulshan Karaeva posted on the internet that she had refused
a demand by Uzbekistan’s National Security Services (SNB) to cooperate as an
informant. Days later, unknown assailants attacked her in the street.
In September, during the peak of the cotton harvest, authorities arrested Uktam
Pardaev, a rights activist well known for reporting on police abuses, torture, and
forced labor. Pardaev was beaten by several officers during the initial arrest and
then held for over 15 days on minor administrative charges of “hooliganism”
and “resisting arrest.” Pardaev and other observers believe he was arrested to
prevent him from monitoring the rights of children and adults who are mobilized
and forced to pick cotton during the annual harvest.
Due to the increasing government crackdown, a branch office of Ezgulik
(Goodness), the country’s only registered human rights organization, was forced
to close, and several rights activists and journalists were forced to flee the
country.
The government also pursued activists and opposition figures living in exile.
In February, an unknown assailant shot prominent Uzbek exiled religious leader
Imam Obidhon-kori Nazarov in Sweden. Nazarov was one of Uzbekistan’s most
popular religious figures in the 1990s until the government shut down his
mosque, forcing him and thousands of his followers into exile. The assassination
attempt came after years of death threats and intimidation. In July,
Sweden’s Chief Prosecutor Krister Petersson stated that Uzbekistan’s secret
services were probably behind the attack.
In April, authorities aired a 20-minute television program accusing France-based
activist Nadejda Atayeva, president of the Association of Human Rights in
Central Asia, of stealing millions of dollars, and calling for her extradition to
Uzbekistan. The film came days after Atayeva had publicly called for an investigation
into an assassination attempt on Nazarov.
The Andijan Massacre
The government continues to refuse an independent investigation into the 2005
massacre of hundreds of citizens in Andijan, who had gathered to protest socioeconomic
problems and civil and political grievances in the country in connection
with the government’s prosecution of local business leaders on charges of
terrorism. The Uzbek government’s persistent refusal to allow an independent
international investigation has denied justice to victims and failed to bring to
account those responsible. Authorities continue to persecute anyone suspected
of having participated in, or witnessed, the atrocities.
The government also continues to intimidate family members of Andijan massacre
survivors who have sought refuge abroad.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains rampant and continues to occur with near-total impunity.
Detainees’ rights are violated at each stage of investigations and trials, despite
habeas corpus amendments passed in 2008. The government has failed to
meaningfully implement recommendations to combat torture made by the UN
special rapporteur in 2003 and other international bodies.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police coerce confessions from detainees using torture,
including beatings with batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists
and ankles, rape, and sexual humiliation. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate
allegations of abuse.
For example, in July, police in western Uzbekistan detained Jehovah’s Witness
Gulchehra Abdullayeva on suspicion of possessing “banned” literature.
Abdullayeva complained that officers made her stand facing a wall for four
hours with no food or water in the summer heat. They then placed a gas mask
over her head and blocked the air supply.
Human Rights Watch continues to receive regular and credible reports of torture,
including suspicious deaths in custody in pre-trial and post-conviction detention.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s Constitution ensures freedom of religion, authorities
continued their multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention, arrest, and torture of
Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls. Over 200 were arrested
or convicted in 2012 on charges related to religious extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi were prosecuted for religious extremism, with dozens arrested
or imprisoned in 2012.
Authorities also imprison and fine Christians who conduct peaceful religious
activities for administrative offenses, such as illegal religious teaching.
Authorities extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations of
prison regulations. Such extensions occur without due process and add years to
a prisoner’s sentence, and appear aimed at keeping religious prisoners incarcerated
indefinitely.
Forced Labor
Forced child and adult labor in the cotton sector remains a serious concern. The
government took no meaningful steps to implement the two International
Labour Organization (ILO) conventions on child labor, which it ratified in March
2008. Despite repeated requests, it continued to refuse the ILO access to monitor
the harvest.
The government continues to force millions of schoolchildren, mainly aged 15 to
17 years old, but some as young as 9, to help with the cotton harvest for up to
two months every year. Officials including police, municipal authorities, and
school principals shut down schools, busing children to cotton fields where
they are made to harvest cotton in line with established daily quotas. They live
in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily from early
morning until evening for little or no pay. In 2012, as in past years, authorities
also forced adults, including schoolteachers, doctors, and other public sector
employees, to participate.
Authorities regularly harass activists who try to document forced adult and child
labor.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government continued to refuse to cooperate with international institutions
but faced virtually no consequences for its intransigence. For the past
decade, it has denied access to all UN special monitors who have requested
invitations—10 at this writing—and has failed to comply with recommendations
that various expert bodies have made.
The EU’s position on human rights remained disappointingly weak, with virtually
no public expressions of concern about Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record,
and no policy consequences for the government’s continued failure to meet the
EU’s reform expectations as articulated by EU foreign ministers in 2010.
Bilateral meetings between the EU and Uzbekistan, including a Cooperation
Committee meeting in Tashkent in July, yielded no known results for human
rights. The EU did not seize the opportunity provided by the five-year anniversary
of its strategy for Central Asia to engage in a critical rethinking of its
approach.
The European Parliament voiced concern about Uzbekistan’s poor record by
adopting a highly critical resolution in December 2011, in which it rejected a
proposed reduction of EU textile tariffs for Uzbekistan until conditions are met,
including enabling the ILO to access the country. In September, for the second
year in a row, Tashkent denied visas to a delegation from Germany’s parliament
that sought to meet Uzbek rights defenders.
In 2012, the US deepened its engagement with Uzbekistan. Since 2004,
Congress had restricted assistance to Uzbekistan based on its deplorable rights
record and further tightened restrictions following the Andijan massacre.
However, on January 18, in a deeply troubling move and despite no meaningful
improvements, the Obama administration exercised the authority Congress
granted it to waive rights-related sanctions and restart military aid to Tashkent.
Uzbekistan is seen as a critical stop in the Northern Distribution Network (NDN)
through which the US has sent non-lethal supplies to Afghanistan since 2009 as
an alternative to unstable supply lines through Pakistan. US military contracts
with Uzbek companies as part of this supply chain are potentially lucrative for
those close to the Uzbek government.
Despite the State Department’s re-designation of Uzbekistan as a “Country of
Particular Concern” for violations of religious freedom, the US government
retained a waiver on the sanctions outlined in the designation.