UQ9<B@JK8E
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains appalling, with no meaningful
improvements in 2011. Torture remains endemic in the criminal justice system.
Authorities continue to target civil society activists, opposition members, and
journalists, and to persecute religious believers who worship outside strict
state controls.
Freedom of expression remains severely limited. Government-sponsored forced
child labor during the cotton harvest continues. Authorities continued to deny
justice for the 2005 Andijan massacre in which government forces shot and
killed hundreds of protestors, most of them unarmed.
Reacting to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, the Uzbek government
increased the presence of security forces across the country and widened its
already-tight control over the internet. Despite the government’s persistent
refusal to address concerns about its abysmal record, the United States and
European Union continued to advance closer relations with the Uzbek government
in 2011, seeking cooperation in the war in Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Uzbek authorities regularly threaten, imprison, ill-treat, and torture human
rights defenders and other peaceful civil society activists. In 2011 the Uzbek
government continued to harass activists and interfere with independent civil
society.
The Uzbek government holds at least 13 human rights defenders in prison, and
has brought charges against others, because of their human rights work. They
are: Solijon Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov, Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov,
Alisher Karamatov, Jamshid Karimov, Norboi Kholjigitov, Abdurasul
Khudainasarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov, Habibulla Okpulatov, Yuldash Rasulov,
Dilmurod Saidov, and Akzam Turgunov.
Several are in very poor health and at least seven have been ill-treated or tortured
in custody. For example, relatives of imprisoned rights defender Gaibullo Jalilov reported after a January 2011 visit that he had been repeatedly tortured,
including being beaten with a stick that left him nearly deaf in both ears.
Other activists, including independent journalists and opposition figures,
remain imprisoned on politically motivated charges. While authorities released
the poet Yusuf Jumaev and three activists, Farkhad Mukhtarov, Norboi
Kholjigitov, and Maksim Popov, the government did not ease its overall campaign
to crush its critics.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance, an Uzbek human rights group, were regularly
subjected to arbitrary detention and de facto house arrest for their
activism. On April 24 a Russian television program exploring conditions for ethnic
Russians in Central Asia interviewed Alliance members Elena Urlaeva,
Viktoriya Bazhenova, and Tatyana Dovlatova. The next night assailants accosted
the activists in their homes, screaming insults and threatening violence.
Following the airing of the program, Dovlatova was sued for defamation, a case
that appears to have been orchestrated by authorities. Police later raided her
home and she lost badly needed disability benefits.
In June Uzbekistan’s Supreme Court granted a Justice Ministry petition to “liquidate”
Human Rights Watch’s Tashkent office. The ruling followed years of the
Uzbek government obstructing Human Rights Watch’s access to the country,
including denying visas and staff member accreditation, most recently in
December 2010. The obstruction and legal ruling led to the organization’s
expulsion from Uzbekistan after 15 years in the country.
In July, in a development that appears designed to discourage diplomats from
engaging with independent activists, authorities brought administrative
charges against a local British Embassy employee, Press Secretary Leonid
Kudryavtsev, for holding “unauthorized meetings” with human rights defenders.
On August 10 Dovlatova and activist Abdullo Tojiboy-ugli were attacked by
assailants in separate incidents that appear to have been instigated by authorities.
On August 22 journalist Elena Bondar was detained at Tashkent airport after
returning from a journalism course abroad. Security agents confiscated her
flash drives, interrogated her, and sent the confiscated items for “analysis” to
the Center for Monitoring of the Uzbek Information Agency, which has been
involved in trumping up cases against journalists.
Also in August Urlaeva was detained and beaten when she went to investigate a
case of three TV journalists, whom authorities had charged with extortion in
Namangan.
The Andijan Massacre
Six years later, the government continues to refuse an independent investigation
into the 2005 massacre of hundreds of citizens in Andijan, denying justice
to victims and failing to bring to account those responsible. Authorities continue
to persecute anyone suspected of having participated in, or witnessed, the
atrocities.
The Uzbek government also continued to intimidate families of Andijan survivors
who have sought refuge abroad. Police subject them to constant surveillance,
call them for questioning, and threaten them with criminal charges or
home confiscation.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Criminal Justice
Torture remains rampant in Uzbekistan and continues to occur with near-total
impunity. Rights of detainees are violated at each stage of investigations and
trials, despite habeas corpus amendments that went into effect in 2008. The
Uzbek government has persistently failed to meaningfully implement steps to
combat torture that the United Nations special rapporteur in 2003 and other
international bodies have recommended.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police use torture to coerce confessions from
detainees. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate allegations of abuse.
In July authorities arrested Said Ashurov, a Tajik national who worked for the
British company Oxus Gold, which the government had forced to close earlier in
the year. A military court sentenced Ashurov to 12 years in prison for “possession
of state secrets” after a closed trial. Witnesses who testified against him
reported to Human Rights Watch that they were beaten in detention to procure
their testimony. Prison authorities have denied Ashurov, who suffers from
chronic hepatitis B, access to adequate medical treatment, resulting in a serious
deterioration of his health.
Human Rights Watch continues to receive regular, credible reports of torture
and ill-treatment in pre-trial and post-conviction detention.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s Constitution ensures freedom of religion, Uzbek authorities
continued their unrelenting, multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention,
arrest, and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls.
Over 100 were arrested or convicted in 2011 on charges related to religious
extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi continued to be prosecuted for religious extremism. Dozens
of Nursi followers were arrested or imprisoned in 2011.
Authorities also continue to impose short-term prison sentences and fines on
Christians and members of other minority religions conducting peaceful religious
activities for administrative offenses, such as illegal religious teaching.
On February 4 the Supreme Court again dismissed an appeal by Tohar
Haydarov, a Baptist sentenced to 10 years on allegedly fabricated drug-related
charges. In July a Protestant couple in Fergana, Muradiljon Umurzakov and
Dilorom Mamasadikova, were physically abused and threatened with charges
after police raided their home and found a Bible.
Authorities continue to extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations
of prison regulations. Such extensions occur without due process and
can add years to a prisoner’s sentence.
In November relatives of Muslim religious prisoners serving sentences at Jaslyk
colony, Uzbekistan’s most notorious prison, told Human Rights Watch that following
a hunger strike, prison authorities tortured several inmates, including by
undressing them naked in front of other inmates, beating, and subjecting them
to sexual humiliation.
Forced Child Labor
Forced child labor in the cotton fields remains a serious concern. The government
took no meaningful steps to implement the two International Labour
Organization (ILO) conventions on child labor, which it ratified in March 2008.
Despite repeated requests, it continued to refuse ILO access to monitor the harvest.
The government continues to force 1.5 to 2 million schoolchildren as young as
nine-years-old to help with the cotton harvest for two months a year. They live
in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily from early
morning until evening for little to no pay. Hunger, exhaustion, and heat stroke
are common.
Human Rights Watch is aware of several cases of authorities harassing activists
who tried to document forced child labor. In September authorities detained
activists Gulshan Karaeva and Nodir Akhatov while they photographed children
forced to pick cotton in the Kashkadarya region.
Also in September, responding to concerns from Human Rights Watch and other
groups, the organizers of New York Fashion Week cancelled a show by the president’s
daughter, Gulnara Karimova, who serves as Uzbekistan’s permanent
representative to the UN and its ambassador to Spain.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government continued to refuse to cooperate with international
institutions but faced virtually no consequences for this intransigence. It continues
to deny access to all eight UN special procedures that have requested
invitations, has failed to comply with recommendations made by various expert bodies, and blocks the ILO from sending independent observers to monitor
compliance with the prohibition of forced child labor in the cotton industry.
The EU’s position on human rights remained disappointingly weak, with virtually
no public expressions of concern about Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record. In
January the European Commission president, Jose Manuel Barroso, received
President Islam Karimov in Brussels, a highly controversial visit that marked
Karimov’s first to Europe since the Andijan massacre. The EU’s eagerness to
deepen its relationship with Uzbekistan without requiring improvements contrasted
with its recent re-thinking of its relationships with autocratic governments
in the Middle East. The annual human rights dialogue between the EU
and Uzbekistan, held in May, again yielded no known results and appeared to
have no bearing on the broader relationship.
In 2011 the US deepened its policy of re-engagement with Uzbekistan. Since
2004 Congress had expressly restricted assistance to Uzbekistan based on its
deplorable rights record and further tightened restrictions following the Andijan
massacre. However, in a particularly troubling move, and despite no meaningful
improvements, the Obama administration sought to re-start assistance and provide
military aid to Uzbekistan.
Uzbekistan is seen as a critical stop in the Northern Distribution Network,
through which the US has sent non-lethal supplies to Afghanistan since 2009
as an alternative to what are viewed as unstable supply lines through Pakistan.
US military contracts with Uzbeks as part of this supply chain are potentially
lucrative for persons close to the Uzbek government. Despite the State
Department’s re-designation in September of Uzbekistan as a “Country of
Particular Concern” for systematic violations of religious freedom, the US government
retained a waiver on the sanctions outlined in the designation.