Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains abysmal, with no substantive improvement
in 2010. Authorities continue to crackdown on civil society activists, opposition
members, and independent journalists, and to persecute religious believers
who worship outside strict state controls. Freedom of expression remains severely
limited. Government-initiated forced child labor during the cotton harvest continues.
The judiciary lacks independence, and the parliament is too weak to curtail the
reach of executive power. In 2010 authorities continued to ignore calls for an
independent investigation into the 2005 Andijan massacre, when authorities shot
and killed hundreds of mostly unarmed protestors. Authorities also harassed families
of Andijan refugees and in April imprisoned a woman who returned to
Uzbekistan four-and-a-half years after fleeing.
While Uzbekistan received praise for cooperating with international actors after
the June 2010 ethnic violence in Southern Kyrgyzstan caused nearly 100,000 ethnic
Uzbek refugees to flee to Uzbekistan, genuine engagement on human rights
remained absent.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Uzbek authorities regularly threaten, imprison, and torture human rights defenders
and other peaceful civil society activists. In 2010 the government further
restricted freedom of speech and increased use of spurious civil suits and criminal
charges to silence perceived government critics.
The Uzbek government has at least 14 human rights defenders in prison, and has
brought criminal charges against another, because of their legitimate human
rights work. Other activists, such as dissident poet Yusuf Jumaev, remain jailed on
politically-motivated charges.
In January 2010 Gaibullo Jalilov, a Karshi-based member of the Human Rights
Society of Uzbekistan, was sentenced to nine years in prison on charges of anticonstitutional
activity and disseminating religious extremist materials. In August new charges were brought against him, and he was sentenced to two years, one
month, and five days in prison after a seriously flawed trial.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance were regularly persecuted and subjected
to arbitrary detention and de facto house arrest for their activism in 2010. On
February 23 two men brutally assaulted Alliance member Dmitrii Tikhonov, leaving
him unconscious after choking and hitting him over the head with a metal object.
On September 16 Alliance member Anatolii Volkov was convicted on fraud
charges after an investigation and trial marred by due process violations. He was
ultimately amnestied. Another Alliance member, Tatyana Dovlatova, faces
trumped-up charges of hooliganism.
On February 10 photographer and videographer Umida Ahmedova was convicted
of defamation and insulting the Uzbek people for publishing a book of photographs
in 2007 and producing a documentary film in 2008 that reflect everyday
life and traditions in Uzbekistan, with a focus on gender inequality. Ahmedova
was amnestied in the courtroom.
In October Vladimir Berezovskii, a veteran journalist and editor of the Vesti.uz
website, was convicted of similar charges based on conclusions issued by the
State Press and Information Agency stating that articles on the website were
defamatory and “could incite inter-ethnic and inter-state hostility and create
panic among the population.”
On October 15 Voice of America correspondent Abdumalik Boboev was convicted
of defamation, insult, and preparation or dissemination of materials that threaten
public security. A substantial fine was imposed.
The Andijan Massacre
The government continues to refuse to investigate the 2005 massacre of hundreds
of citizens in Andijan or to prosecute those responsible. Authorities continue
to persecute anyone they suspect of having participated in or witnessed the
atrocities. On April 30 Diloram Abdukodirova, an Andijan refugee who returned to
Uzbekistan in January 2010, was sentenced to 10 years and two months in prison
for illegal border crossing and anti-constitutional activity despite assurances to her family she would not be harmed if she returned. Abdukodirova appeared at
one court hearing with facial bruising, indicating possible ill-treatment in custody.
The Uzbek government also continues to intimidate and harass families of
Andijan survivors who have sought refuge abroad. Police subject them to constant
surveillance, call them for questioning, and threaten them with criminal
charges or home confiscation. School officials publicly humiliate refugees’ children.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains rampant in Uzbekistan. Detainees’ rights are violated at each
stage of investigations and trials, despite habeas corpus amendments that went
into effect in 2008. The Uzbek government has failed to meaningfully implement
recommendations to combat torture that the United Nations special rapporteur
made in 2003.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police use torture and other illegal means to coerce statements
and confessions from detainees. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate
defendants’ allegations of abuse.
In June Yusuf Jumaev, serving a five-year prison sentence since 2008, was put in a
cell with men who regularly beat him. During a harsh beating on June 12 he was
kicked in the chest and head, causing his ear to bleed. Prison authorities ignored
Jumaev’s repeated requests to transfer cells.
On July 20, 37-year-old Shavkat Alimhodjaev, imprisoned for religious offenses,
died in custody. The official cause of death was anemia, but Alimhodjaev had no
known history of the disease. According to family, Alimhodjaev’s face bore possible
marks of ill-treatment, including a swollen eye. Authorities returned his body
to his family’s home at night. They insisted he be buried before sunrise and
remained present until the burial. Authorities have not begun investigating the
death.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s constitution ensures freedom of religion, Uzbek authorities
continued their unrelenting, multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention,
arrest, and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls or
belong to unregistered religious organizations. Over 100 were arrested or convicted
in 2010 on charges related to religious extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi were harassed and prosecuted for religious extremism, leading
to prison sentences or fines. Dozens of Nursi followers were arrested or imprisoned
in 2010 in Bukhara, Ferghana, and Tashkent: at least 29 were convicted
between May and August alone.
Christians and members of other minority religions holding peaceful religious
activities also faced short-term prison sentences and fines for administrative
offenses such as violating the law on religious organizations and illegal religious
teaching. According to Forum 18, at least five members of Christian minority
groups are serving long prison sentences, including Tohar Haydarov, a Baptist
who received a 10-year sentence in March 2010 for drug-related charges that his
supporters say were fabricated in retaliation for his religious activity.
Authorities continue to extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations
of prison regulations or on new criminal charges. Such extensions occur
without due process and can add years to a prisoner’s sentence.
Child Labor
Forced child labor in cotton fields remains a serious concern. The government
took no meaningful steps to implement the two International Labour Organization
(ILO) conventions on child labor, which Uzbekistan ratified in March 2008.
The government continues to force hundreds of thousands of schoolchildren,
some of them as young as ten, to help with the cotton harvest for two months a
year. They live in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily
from early morning until evening for little or no money. Hunger, exhaustion, and
heat stroke are common.
Human Rights Watch is aware of several instances when local authorities
harassed and threatened activists who tried to document forced child labor.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government’s cooperation with international institutions remains poor.
It continues to deny access to all eight UN special procedures that have requested
invitations, including those on torture and human rights defenders, and
blocks the ILO from sending independent observers to monitor Uzbekistan’s compliance
with the prohibition of forced child labor in the cotton industry.
A March 2010 review by the UN Human Rights Committee resulted in a highly critical
assessment and calls for the government to guarantee journalists and human
rights defenders in Uzbekistan “the right to freedom of expression in the conduct
of their activities,” and to address lack of accountability for the Andijan massacre
and persisting torture and ill-treatment of detainees.
During a visit to Tashkent in April, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the
Uzbek government to “deliver” on its international human rights commitments.
The European Union’s position on human rights in Uzbekistan remained disappointingly
weak, with virtually no public expressions of concern about
Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record. The annual human rights dialogue between the
EU and Uzbekistan, held in May, again yielded no known results and appeared to
have no bearing on the broader relationship. In October the EU Foreign Affairs
Council reviewed Uzbekistan’s progress in meeting human rights criteria the EU
has set for it, noting “lack of substantial progress” on areas the council had outlined
the previous year when remaining sanctions imposed after the Andijan massacre
were lifted. The council reiterated calls for the Uzbek government to take
steps to improve its record, including releasing all jailed human rights defenders,
allowing NGOs to operate freely, and cooperating with UN special rapporteurs.
However, it again stopped short of articulating any policy consequences for continued
non-compliance.
The United States maintains a congressionally-mandated visa ban against Uzbek
officials linked to serious human rights abuses. However, its relationship with
Uzbekistan is increasingly dominated by the US Department of Defense (DOD), which uses routes through Uzbekistan as part of the Northern Distribution
Network to supply forces in Afghanistan. US military contracts with Uzbeks as part
of this supply chain are potentially as lucrative for persons close to the Uzbek
government as direct US aid would be. Despite the US State Department’s re-designation
in January 2009 of Uzbekistan as a “Country of Particular Concern” for
systematic violations of religious freedom, the US government retained a waiver
on the sanctions outlined in the designation. The DOD’s prominence in the relationship
with the Uzbek government raises concerns over mixed messages about
human rights issues among different US agencies.