Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remained abysmal across a wide spectrum of
violations. The country is virtually closed to independent scrutiny. Freedom of
expression is severely limited. Authorities continue to crack down on rights
activists, harass activists living in exile, and persecute those who practice their
religion outside strict state controls. Forced labor of adults and children continues.
Torture remains systematic in the criminal justice system. The International
Committee of the Red Cross took the unusual step in April of announcing publicly
its decision to end prison visits in Uzbekistan. It cited its inability to follow
standard procedures for visits, including being able to access all detainees of
concern and speaking with detainees in private.
Despite continuing grave abuses, the United States and the European Union
advanced closer relations with Uzbekistan, seeking cooperation in the war in
Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Human rights defenders face the threat of government reprisal, including
imprisonment and torture. Authorities block international rights groups and
media from operating in Uzbekistan.
Uzbekistan has imprisoned more than a dozen human rights defenders on
wrongful charges and has brought charges against others because of their
work. Those currently serving prison sentences include: Solijon
Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov, Mehrinisso Hamdamova, Zulhumor
Hamdamova, Isroiljon Holdarov, Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov, Turaboi
Juraboev, Abdurasul Khudoinazarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov, Chuyan
Mamatkulov, Zafarjon Rahimov, Yuldash Rasulov, Bobomurod Razzakov,
Dilmurod Saidov, Nematjon Siddikov, and Akzam Turgunov.
Other peaceful opposition figures remain imprisoned on politically motivated
charges following unfair trials, including: Muhammad Bekjanov, Batyrbek
Eshkuziev, Ruhiddin Fahruddinov, Hayrullo Hamidov, Bahrom Ibragimov, Murod
Juraev, Davron Kabilov, Matluba Karimova, Samandar Kukanov, Gayrat Mehliboev, Erkin Musaev, Yusuf Ruzimuradov, Rustam Usmanov, Ravshanbek
Vafoev, and Akram Yuldashev. Many detained activists are in serious ill-health
and have been tortured in prison.
On January 17 Khorezm-based activist Valerii Nazarov appeared outside his
home heavily drugged and unable to speak. He went missing on December 7,
2012, the day before he was to take part in an opposition rally marking the 20th
anniversary of Uzbekistan’s Constitution. Before going missing, Nazarov’s
house was surrounded by security services. Friends believe he was held in a
mental hospital.
On February 5, 25 men broke into the home of Fergana-based rights activist
Nematjon Siddikov, beating him and his three sons. Days earlier Siddikov had
alleged the involvement of officials in a smuggling ring along the Uzbek-Kyrgyz
border. Although in the vicinity, police failed to protect Siddikov during the
attack but intervened later to arrest him on charges of defamation and assault.
In May, Siddikov and one of his sons were sentenced to six years’ imprisonment.
In June, authorities deported Kyrgyz rights defender Tolekan Ismailova when
she arrived at the Tashkent airport. Also in June, Ergashbai Rahimov, an activist
who had advocated for the release of imprisoned journalist Solijon
Abdurakhamanov, was detained for over a month in Karakalpakstan on defamation
charges.
On July 8, a court in Karshi fined rights defenders Elena Urlaeva, Malohat
Eshonkulova, and others a total of US$15,500 for staging a peaceful protest
over the incommunicado detention of Hasan Choriev, father of the leader of
Birdamlik, an opposition movement. Several women attacked Urlaeva and others
moments before they began their protest outside the local office of the
prosecutor general. Officials in the building did not stop the beating but later
arrested the activists.
In August, 60-year-old Bobomurad Razzakov, the Bukhara region representative
of the rights group Ezgulik (“Compassion”), was convicted of involvement in
human trafficking and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment.
On August 23, a court in Jizzakh sentenced 75-year-old activist Turaboi Juraboev
to five years in prison. Arrested in May, Juraboev was found guilty of extortion despite the fact that three of the plaintiffs withdrew their complaints. Juraboev
is known for his anti-corruption work.
In July, a Tashkent court sentenced in absentia France-based activist Nadejda
Atayeva, her father, and her brother to six, seven, and nine years’ imprisonment,
respectively, on trumped-up charges of embezzlement. Prosecutors never
informed Atayeva about the trial, which was held in secret.
In September, authorities arrested Sergei Naumov, a journalist known for his
independent reporting on politically sensitive issues such as ethnic discrimination,
under circumstances that appeared orchestrated to keep him from carrying
out his work. Naumov was held in incommunicado detention for 12 days
after a hearing marred by procedural violations and without access to independent
counsel.
The Andijan Massacre
Eight years on, authorities continue to refuse an independent investigation into
the 2005 government massacre of hundreds of people in Andijan. They had
gathered to protest in connection with the prosecution of local businessmen on
terrorism charges. Authorities persecute anyone suspected of having witnessed
the atrocities or who attempts to speak publicly about them.
On May 13, authorities arrested activists Elena Urlaeva and Adelaida Kim as
they attempted to lay a wreath of flowers at a public monument in Tashkent to
commemorate the massacre’s eighth anniversary.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Torture plagues Uzbekistan’s places of detention, where it is often used to
coerce confessions and occurs with impunity. Methods include beating with
batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists and ankles, rape, and sexual
humiliation.
There is no evidence that the introduction of habeas corpus in 2008 has
reduced torture in pretrial custody or ensured due process for detainees.
Authorities routinely violate the right to counsel. Defense lawyers that take on
politically sensitive cases have been disbarred since the passage of a law in
2009 dissolving the independent bar association.