Uzbekistan
The Uzbek government’s human rights record remains atrocious. In October 2008
the European Union lifted a visa ban against several Uzbek officials, citing
progress in human rights. Yet in the wake of that decision the Uzbek authorities
intensified their crackdown on civil society activists, members of the opposition,
and independent journalists. Torture and ill-treatment remain rampant and occur
in a culture of impunity. A January 2008 law on habeas corpus has failed to protect
detainees from torture.
Authorities continue to persecute religious believers who worship outside state
controls, and freedom of expression remains severely limited. Government-initiated
forced child labor during the cotton season continues.
The Uzbek judiciary lacks independence, and parliament is too weak to curtail the
reach of executive power. The Uzbek government has ignored repeated calls for
an independent inquiry into the May 2005 Andijan massacre, when state security
forces killed hundreds of protestors, most of them unarmed.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
The Uzbek authorities continue to intimidate, imprison, and torture human rights
defenders, independent journalists, and other peaceful civil society activists, and
they intensified repression following the EU’s easing of sanctions in October
2008. At this writing the Uzbek government holds at least 14 civil society activists
in prison because of their legitimate work. They include Gaibullo Jalilov, a member
of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan whose human rights work focuses
on independent Muslims, who was charged in September 2009 with upsetting
the constitutional order and disseminating religious extremist materials; at this
writing Jalilov is in pretrial detention. Sanjar Umarov, leader of the Sunshine
Coalition, was released on amnesty on November 7, 2009, because of his health.
Farkhad Mukhtarov, a member of the Human Rights Alliance of Uzbekistan, was
sentenced to five years in prison on October 2, on charges of fraud and bribery.
Local defenders believe the charges were fabricated in retaliation for his human
rights activities.
The government has moved vigorously to silence activists who oppose official corruption
and abuse of power. On July 30 the Tailak district court sentenced
Dilmurod Saidov, an independent journalist, to 12½ years in prison on trumpedup
charges of extortion and forgery. Local activists believe Saidov was imprisoned
because of his investigations into official corruption in Samarkand region and his
advocacy for farmers’ rights. Also in late July, authorities arrested Oyazimhon
Hidirova, chair of the Arnasai branch of the International Human Rights Society of
Uzbekistan, on charges of hooliganism, fraud, and tax evasion. In early June
Hidirova had written to various officials protesting repeated, unlawful land confiscation
and resale by the head of the regional government. Hidirova was released
under an amnesty on August 30. In early October Ferghana-based human rights
defender Ganihon Mamatkhanov was arrested on trumped-up charges of fraud
and bribery. Mamatkhanov works for social and economic rights, including the
rights of farmers, a number of whom were the victims of unlawful land confiscation
earlier in 2009. Local rights defenders believe that his arrest was in retaliation
for his public criticism of the government and his human rights activities.
In several incidents during April and May, five members of the Human Rights
Alliance of Uzbekistan were attacked, threatened, and detained. On the morning
of April 15, Alliance member Elena Urlaeva was leaving home with her five-yearold
son, Mukhammad, when two men assaulted her. Shouting profanities, they
told Urlaeva that she “should have left the country long ago.” A week later an
unknown assailant attacked Mukhammad, beating him repeatedly on the head
with a stick and leaving him hospitalized with concussion. On May 27 Urlaeva
and fellow Alliance members Salomat Boimatova and Ilnur Abdulov were
detained as they travelled to the United Nations office in Tashkent to deliver their
recent report on the status of human rights defenders in Uzbekistan. When they
objected, Abdulov was severely beaten. Urlaeva was forced to sign a statement
that she would cease human rights activities until after June 10, when EU and
Uzbek representatives were scheduled to meet in Tashkent for their annual
human rights dialogue.
From November 7 to 14, local authorities in six locations detained at least seven
activists for attempting to meet with leaders of the Birdamlik opposition movement.
Two Jizzakh-based human rights defenders, Mamir Azimov and Bakhtior Khamroev, were beaten by law enforcement officers for meeting with the opposition
leaders.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment remain endemic to the criminal justice system. The
Uzbek authorities have failed to address the culture of impunity for torture or to
implement recommendations to combat torture made by the UN special rapporteur
in 2003. In January 2008 a much-touted habeas corpus law went into effect
in Uzbekistan, but the reform has done little to bolster the rights of defendants or
prevent torture and ill-treatment in detention.
Human Rights Watch continued to receive numerous, credible reports of torture
and ill-treatment, particularly during pretrial detention. Yet judges routinely
ignored allegations of torture and refused to examine such claims. Kushodbek
Usmonov, a 67-year-old independent journalist, testified during his trial in March
2009 that he had been beaten with hard objects in the groin and abdomen and
had been threatened with rape after being forced to lie face down, naked. The
judge reportedly ignored these allegations.
On December 30, 2008, Uzbek prison officials tried to force Alisher Karamatov, an
imprisoned human rights activist, to sign a confession regarding a disciplinary
violation. After he refused and threatened to complain to the Prosecutor’s Office,
officials forced Karamatov, who had recently suffered from tuberculosis, to stand
outside in sub-freezing weather dressed only in his thin prison uniform. After
three hours in the cold, Karamatov signed.
In mid-June 2009 officials at Jaslyk prison put the jailed dissident and poet Yusuf
Jumaev in an isolation cell for eight days. His family said that during that time
prison guards burned him by holding a hot electric teapot to his shoulders, and
for at least two days denied him food and water, as well as use of a toilet.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s constitution ensures freedom of religion, authorities fiercely
suppress any religious group that functions outside state control. In particular, authorities have intimidated, beaten, and imprisoned on false charges Muslims
who are affiliated with independent organizations and clerics.
In three separate trials in June and July 2009, 32 followers of the late Turkish
Muslim theologian Said Nursi were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 5 to 11
years for religious extremism. This brings to 58 the number of Nursi followers who
have been imprisoned since late 2008.
Up to 60 pious Muslims in Shakhrihan district, Andijan region, were detained in
June 2009 on suspicion of illegal religious activity. In August, 11 pious Muslim
men were put on trial on religious extremism charges in Karshi. In November, at
least 12 pious Muslim women were detained in Karshi, one of whom is a leader in
a local mosque; the charges against them are not known.
Authorities continue to arrest members of minority religions for their peaceful religious
activity. Three Jehovah’s Witnesses and Pentecostal minister Dmitry
Shestakov continue to serve lengthy prison sentences. According to Forum 18, an
independent, international religious freedom group, on August 21, 2009, anti-terror
police in Tashkent raided the worship service of the registered Donam
Protestant church. Seven church members were arrested and four, including the
pastor, were sentenced to 15-day prison terms. Christian literature was confiscated
during the raid and later destroyed on court order.
The Andijan Massacre and the Situation of Refugees
The government has persisted in its refusal to investigate the 2005 massacre of
hundreds of citizens in Andijan, or to prosecute those responsible for it. Instead,
authorities have clamped down on any individual they believe to have participated
in the events or who may know the truth about what occurred. The government’s
reliance on surveillance, interrogations, ostracism, and threats against
survivors of Andijan and their families continues to trigger further refugees from
the area.
On May 26, 2009, hours after a series of violent acts in the Andijan area, including
at least one suicide bombing, police visited at least three homes of relatives
of individuals imprisoned for alleged involvement in the May 2005 events or who
had fled Uzbekistan in their wake. 
The Uzbek government continues to work with Kyrgyz authorities to forcibly return
Uzbek asylum seekers to Uzbekistan. Since 2005 more than a dozen people have
been returned against their will. Haiatjon Juraboev, who was snatched off the
streets of Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, in September 2008, was sentenced in Tashkent to
13 years’ imprisonment in February 2009 for religious extremism and illegal border
crossing.
Child Labor
Forced child labor in the cotton industry remains a serious concern. Although
since mid-2008 Uzbekistan has ratified two conventions prohibiting child labor,
the government continues to force hundreds of thousands of schoolchildren into
the fields to pick cotton and weed cotton fields.
Children as young as 10 pick cotton for two months a year. They live in filthy conditions,
contract illnesses, miss school, and work from early morning until
evening daily for little or no money. Hunger, exhaustion, and heat stroke are common.
At least five children died during the 2008 harvest, according to the
Environmental Justice Foundation.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government remains uncooperative with international institutions, particularly
UN bodies. It has refused to allow access to eight special rapporteurs,
including those on torture and human rights defenders.
In December 2008 Uzbekistan’s human rights record was reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council. The government
denied the existence of a number of well-documented human rights
problems and rejected numerous recommendations, including that it release
imprisoned human rights defenders and end harassment and intimidation of civil
society activists.
The European Union’s position on human rights in Uzbekistan remained disappointingly
weak. Following a nearly year-long silence in the face of Tashkent’s
deteriorating rights record, EU foreign ministers on October 27, 2009, lifted the arms embargo against Uzbekistan, removing the last remaining component of the
sanctions the EU had imposed after the Andijan massacre in 2005. The June 2009
human rights dialogue between the EU and Uzbekistan yielded no known results.
The United States government also appeared to have weakened its engagement
on human rights in Uzbekistan, interpreted by many as a conscious choice to
safeguard other interests being pursued by the administration. There were no
known policy consequences stemming from new legislation introduced by congress
in 2008, which provided for targeted sanctions and spelled out concrete
human rights benchmarks the Uzbek government would need to meet in order to
normalize relations with the US.
In September 2009 the director of the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR),
Janez Lenarcic, praised the Uzbek government for adhering to commitments it
had made as an OSCE member state, including the release of some human rights
activists and improvement of detention conditions, despite overwhelming evidence
to the contrary.