Venezuela
President Hugo Chávez and his supporters have effectively neutralized the independence
of Venezuela’s judiciary. In the absence of a judicial check on its
actions, the Chávez government has systematically undermined journalists’ freedom
of expression, workers’ freedom of association, and the ability of civil society
groups to promote human rights.
Police abuses remain a widespread problem. Prison conditions are among the
worst on the continent, with a high rate of fatalities from inmate violence.
Independence of the Judiciary
In 2004 Chávez and his supporters in the National Assembly launched a political
takeover of the Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters and creating
new measures that make it possible to purge justices from the Court. Since then,
the Court has largely abdicated its role as a check on executive power. It has
failed to uphold fundamental rights enshrined in the Venezuelan constitution in
key cases involving government efforts to limit freedom of expression and association.
Prosecution of Political Opponents
In 2009 several prominent opposition figures were targeted for criminal prosecution,
raising concerns that without independent courts they have little chance of a
fair trial. The targeted leaders included the former governor of Zulia state and
opposition candidate in the 2006 presidential election, Manuel Rosales, whose
arrest on corruption charges was ordered in March 2009. In an October 2008
speech, Chávez had publicly appealed to the attorney general and the Supreme
Court to take this action against Rosales: “[A] type like that should be in prison....
I’ll put myself in charge of the operation, and the operation will be called ‘Manuel
Rosales, you go to jail.’” To avoid arrest, Rosales left Venezuela and was granted
political asylum in Peru in April 2009. Raúl Baduel, an army general who commanded
the military operation that returned Chávez to power during the April
2002 coup attempt, is currently in Ramo Verde military prison, facing trial by a military court on corruption charges. Baduel was an outspoken critic of constitutional
reforms proposed by Chávez and his supporters in the National Assembly.
Media Freedom
Venezuela enjoys vibrant public debate in which anti-government and pro-government
media are equally vocal in their criticism and defense of Chávez. However,
in its efforts to influence the control and content of the media, the government
has engaged in discriminatory actions against media that air opposition viewpoints,
strengthened the state’s capacity to limit free speech, and created powerful
incentives for government critics to engage in self-censorship.
Laws introduced since Chávez took office that have contributed to a climate of
self-censorship include amendments to the criminal code extending the scope of
desacato (disrespect) laws, and a broadcasting statute that encourages self-censorship
by allowing the arbitrary suspension of channels for the vaguely defined
offense of “incitement.”
The government has used the broadcasting law to target Globovisión, the only
remaining outspokenly critical television outlet on public airwaves. As of
November 2009 the channel was facing six investigations by CONATEL, the state
telecommunications commission, for alleged infractions of the law’s vague public
order provisions. In May 2009, for example, CONATEL opened an investigation
against Globovisión on the grounds that its coverage of an earthquake, which
called for calm but also criticized the government for slowness in providing information,
“could generate alarm, fear, anxiety, or panic in the population.”
The government has abused its control of broadcasting frequencies to punish
radio stations with overtly critical programming. In July 2009, 32 stations were
summarily taken off the air after CONATEL found that their licenses were not in
order. The stations were given no opportunity to present arguments or evidence
so that their claims could be assessed in a transparent manner. Moreover, many
argued that over the years CONATEL had failed to respond to their requests to regularize
their legal status. CONATEL’s director announced in September that another
group of 29 radio stations would shortly be closed, and that the status of a further 177 was under review. By early November, however, no action had been
taken.
President Chávez has repeatedly responded to critical coverage by threatening
television stations that they would lose their broadcasting rights as soon as their
concessions expired. Radio Caracas Television (RCTV) lost its concession in 2007,
after Chávez announced at a nationally broadcast military ceremony that RCTV
would not have its concession renewed because of its support for the 2002 coup
attempt. Neither this accusation nor an alleged breach of broadcasting standards
was ever proved in a proceeding in which RCTV had an opportunity to present a
defense.
The government has taken, or proposed, other measures to extend government
control over broadcasting content. Under a decree issued in September 2009, private
radio stations will have to broadcast for three-and-a-half hours every day
programs selected by the government and produced by government-certified
independent producers. In July CONATEL’s director proposed imposing limits on
the ability of private radio stations to share their own programming on a voluntary
basis. No more than three private radio stations would be allowed to group
together to transmit programming of their own, and for no longer than half an
hour a day.
In July 2009 the attorney general proposed legislation on “media crimes” that
would establish prison sentences of up to four years for anyone who, through
media outlets, provides “false” information that “harm[s] the interests of the
state.” After strenuous objections to the proposal both within Venezuela and by
international organizations, the president of the National Assembly announced
that it would not be debated.
Labor Rights
The Chávez government has engaged in systematic violations of workers’ rights
aimed at undercutting established labor unions while favoring new, parallel
unions that support its political agenda.
The government requires that all union elections be organized and certified by the
National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority. This mandatory oversight of union elections violates international standards, which guarantee workers the
right to elect their representatives in full freedom and according to the conditions
they determine. Established unions whose elections have not been certified by
the CNE are barred from participating in collective bargaining.
The government has promised for several years to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. Yet new regulations
introduced by the CNE in May 2009 set out detailed rules governing union elections,
and fail to state clearly that elections not organized and certified by the
CNE are legally valid. At this writing, a long-awaited reform of labor legislation is
still under consultation and no bill has yet been presented in the legislature.
In the crucial state oil industry, government officials have themselves interfered
in union elections. In 2009 the CNE repeatedly postponed an election in the oil
workers’ federation, FUTPV, due to challenges to the electoral register lodged by
union factions backed by the government, thereby delaying negotiation of a collective
contract for the industry. The president of the state oil company, PDVSA,
who is also the minister of energy and oil, announced at a televised political rally
that he would “discuss the collective contract only when the revolution gains control
of the FUTPV,” and would not “sit down to discuss a collective contract with
any enemy of Chávez.” He said he was backing one of the factions in the elections
and accused its opponents—most of whom also supported the government,
but were critical of the company management—of being “disguised enemies” of
the revolution. The union elections, finally held on October 1, resulted in the victory
of the faction backed by PDVSA.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela and extrajudicial killings by security agents
remain a recurring problem. Thousands of extrajudicial executions have been
recorded in the past decade. Impunity for these crimes remains the norm. The
attorney general reported in 2009 that investigations had been opened into
6,422 cases of human rights abuses by police by September 2008, resulting in
the prosecution of 463 officers.
In April 2008 the Chávez government issued by decree an Organic Law of Police
Service and National Police, which includes measures aimed at improving police
accountability. It created a new office within the Ministry of Interior and Justice,
called the Police Rector, to evaluate the performance of all police departments,
including their compliance with human rights standards. Implementation of the
law, however, has been slow.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
insufficient guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Overcrowding, deteriorating infrastructure, and the poor training of guards
contribute to the brutal conditions. In May 2009 the director of the prison service
claimed that levels of violence had fallen by 52 percent as a result of government
efforts to “humanize” the penitentiary system. Venezuelan prison reform advocates
deny that violence has declined.
Human Rights Defenders
The Chávez government has aggressively sought to discredit local and international
human rights organizations. In September 2009, for example, a senior official
of the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela, who has his own show on
state television, accused Liliana Ortega, director of COFAVIC, an NGO that works
for the victims of police violence, of pocketing part of their compensation money.
Officials, including the president, have repeatedly made unsubstantiated allegations
that human rights advocates were engaged in efforts to destabilize the
country. The government often tries to have local rights advocates barred from
international human rights gatherings, typically on grounds that their work is
political or that they receive US or other foreign funding. Rights advocates have
also faced prosecutorial harassment.
Key International Actors
The Venezuelan government has increasingly rejected international monitoring of
its human rights record. In May 2009, reacting to the Venezuela chapter of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights annual report, President Chávez
threatened to take Venezuela out of the Organization of American States and create
an alternative organization of “free peoples.” The government has referred to
the commission’s “biased position” as its reason for not inviting it to visit the
country since 2002.
In a December 2008 ruling, the Supreme Court called on the government to
revoke Venezuela’s ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights.