V<E<QL<C8
The weakening of Venezuela’s democratic system of checks and balances
under President Hugo Chávez has contributed to a precarious human rights situation.
Without judicial checks on its actions, the government has systematically
undermined the right to free expression, workers’ freedom of association,
and the ability of human rights groups to protect rights.
Weeks before the new National Assembly—with a substantial opposition composition—
took office in January 2011, Chávez’s supporters in the legislature
adopted several laws that increased the government’s ability to undercut
rights.
Police abuses and impunity remain a grave problem. Prison conditions are
deplorable, and fatality rates high due to inmate violence.
Judicial Independence
In 2004 Chávez and his legislative allies conducted a political takeover of the
Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters and creating new measures
that make it possible to purge justices from the court. In December 2010
the outgoing legislators from Chávez’s political party modified the timeline so
they could make appointments before leaving office: they appointed 9 permanent
justices and 32 stand-ins, including several allies. Since 2004, the court
has largely abdicated its role as a check on executive power, failing to protect
fundamental rights enshrined in the constitution.
In 2011 Supreme Court President Luisa Estella Morales declared that laws in
Venezuela “respond to an ideological purpose,” while Justice Fernando Torre
Alba stated that courts “must severely … sanction behaviors or cases that
undermine the construction of [Bolivarian] socialism.”
Individual judges may face reprisals if they rule against government interests.
In December 2009 Judge María Lourdes Afiuni was detained on the day she
authorized the conditional release of Eligio Cedeño, a banker accused of corruption.
Afiuni was following a recommendation by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detentions, given that Cedeño had been in pre-trial detention
for almost three years, although Venezuelan law prescribes a two-year
limit. The day after her arrest, Chávez publicly branded Afiuni a “bandit” who
should receive the maximum 30 years in prison. Accused of corruption, abuse
of authority, and “favoring evasion of justice,” her case is pending before a
judge who has stated publicly: “I would never betray my Commander because I
take the Revolution in my blood…”
Judge Afiuni was held in pre-trial detention in deplorable conditions in a violent
prison for over a year, and remains under house arrest. Three UN human rights
special rapporteurs and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights have
denounced her arrest and called for her release.
Legislating by Decree
In December 2010 the outgoing National Assembly passed an enabling law that
granted Chávez broad powers to legislate by decree on a wide range of issues
for 18 months. The law’s vague provisions could directly impact the exercise of
rights by, for example, allowing the president to determine which penalties can
be imposed when someone commits a crime. As of November 2011 Chávez had
adopted over 20 legislative decrees, including one reinstating crimes previously
derogated by the legislature. The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality
of this decree, which criminalized several banking practices, arguing that economic
crimes are “crimes against humanity” and could not be decriminalized.
Freedom of Media
Venezuela enjoys a vibrant public debate in which anti-government and progovernment
media criticize and defend the president. However, the government
has discriminated against media that air political opponents’ views, strengthened
the state’s ability to limit free speech and created powerful incentives for
government critics to self-censor.
Laws contributing to a climate of self-censorship include the 2005 amendments
to the criminal code extending the scope of desacato laws that criminalize disrespect
of high government officials, and a broadcasting statute allowing arbitrary suspension of channels for the vaguely defined offense of “incitement.” In
December 2010 the National Assembly extended the scope of this statute to
include the internet. It also amended the telecommunications law, granting the
government power to suspend or revoke concessions to private outlets if it is
“convenient for the interests of the nation” or demanded by public order and
security.
The government has abused its control of broadcasting frequencies to punish
radio and television stations with overtly critical programming. In 2009 the government
broadcasting authority CONATEL closed 32 radio stations and reported
that over 200 others were under review, without providing a list of the stations
being investigated. Several stations have since limited their critical programming.
In November 2011 CONATEL suspended several radio stations while it
investigated them, but no additional stations had been closed at this writing.
RCTV, Venezuela’s most popular critical television station, was pulled from public
airwaves in 2007. RCTV International, the cable channel that replaced it, was
removed from cable broadcasting in 2010 after CONATEL ordered that cable
providers suspend transmitting channels that it had not certified as “international”
channels. RCTV’s lawyers say CONATEL has rejected RCTV’s requests to
obtain this certification, and the channel remains unable to transmit in
Venezuela.
CONATEL has opened seven administrative investigations against Globovisión—
the only TV channel available without cable critical of the government—that
could lead to the station’s suspension or revocation of its license. In October
2011 CONATEL fined Globovisión US$2.1 million for allegedly violating the
broadcasting statute when it aired images of a June prison riot. The other six
cases have yet to be resolved; some have been pending for over a year.
In 2010 the government adopted vague norms that expand its power to limit
access to almost any information it holds, including creating a Center for
Situational Studies of the Nation with broad powers to limit public dissemination
of “information, facts or circumstance[s]” it deems confidential.
Prosecuting Government Critics
Several prominent critics of Chávez’s government have been targeted for criminal
prosecution in recent years. The courts’ lack of independence reduced the
chances of them receiving a fair trial.
In July 2011 Oswaldo Álvarez Paz, a former governor of Zulia state and member
of an opposition political party, was sentenced to two years in prison for criticizing
the Chávez administration on TV. Álvarez Paz was convicted of disseminating
false information for saying that Chávez was not a democrat and that
“Venezuela has turned into a center of operations that facilitates the business
of drug-trafficking.” Álvarez Paz is serving his sentence on conditional liberty
but cannot leave the country without judicial authorization.
Guillermo Zuloaga, president of Globovisión, remains under criminal investigation
for allegedly disseminating false information and for offending the president.
At a public meeting in March 2010, Zuloaga accused Chávez of ordering
the shooting of demonstrators during the 2002 coup. In a June televised
speech, Chávez expressed outrage that Zuloaga was still free. A week later
police arrived at Zuloaga’s house to arrest him and his son for alleged irregularities
in their car sales business, an investigation their lawyers said had been
stalled for months. The two men, who were not at home, subsequently fled the
country.
In March 2011 Rubén González, secretary general of the Ferrominera Orinoco
Union, was sentenced to over seven years in prison for organizing and participating
in a strike with 2,000 workers in Guyana to protest a government-owned
company’s failure to comply with a collective bargaining agreement. González
was convicted for incitement to commit crimes, restricting freedom to work, and
violating the prohibition to enter security zones. Not only was the prosecution
of González criticized by the International Labour Organization and Venezuelan
unions, but it was also denounced by pro-government labor leaders in
Venezuela. Upon appeal, the Supreme Court ordered another judge to re-try
González. The case against González, who was released on conditional liberty,
remained pending at this writing.
Human Rights Defenders
Chávez’s government has aggressively sought to discredit human rights
defenders. In June Justice Minister Tarek El Aissami accused Humberto Prado of
the Venezuelan Observatory of Prisons of “destabilizing the prison system” and
having been “an accomplice in the massacre of inmates” in the past. After several
official media outlets discredited Prado, he received multiple death threats
and left Venezuela for two months.
In July 2010 the Supreme Court ruled that “obtaining financial resources, either
directly or indirectly, from foreign states with the intent of using them against
the Republic, [and] the interest of the people [could constitute] treason.” That
same month members of Chávez’s political party filed a criminal complaint with
the Attorney General’s Office, alleging that several local human rights NGOs
had committed treason by receiving funding from foreign donors. Over 30 NGOs
are currently under investigation, according to local media.
In December 2010 the National Assembly adopted two laws that, if applied to
human rights organizations, could severely undermine their ability to work
independently. The “Law for the Defense of Political Sovereignty and National
Self Determination” blocks NGOS that “defend political rights” or “monitor the
performance of public bodies” from receiving international funding. It also
imposes stiff fines on organizations that invite foreigners who express opinions
that offend institutions or undermine national sovereignty. The “Organic Law on
Social Control”—which regulates the work of organizations and individuals that
have an impact on “general or collective interests”—states that individuals
must follow the law’s socialist principles and values: those who violate the law
may face civil, administrative, or criminal sanctions.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela, where extrajudicial killings by security
agents remain a problem. The minister of the interior and justice has estimated
that police commit one of every five crimes. According to the most recent official
statistics, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people between
January 2000 and the first third of 2009.
Impunity for human rights violations remains the norm. In 2010, prosecutors
charged individuals allegedly responsible for abuses in less than 3 percent of
cases investigated.
In April 2008 Chávez’s administration issued a decree that established a new
national police force and enacted measures to promote non-abusive policing
proposed by a commission comprised of government and NGO representatives.
At this writing there had been no independent evaluation of the new police
force’s performance.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained
guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Hundreds of violent prison deaths occur every year. In June 2011, at least 25
people were killed and over 60 seriously injured, including prisoners and
National Guard members, after clashes between inmates in the El Rodeo prisons.
Labor Rights
The National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority, has the power to organize
and certify all union elections, violating international standards that guarantee
workers the right to elect their representatives in full freedom, according to
conditions they determine. Established unions whose elections have not been
CNE-certified may not participate in collective bargaining.
For several years the government has promised to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. Reforms that
explicitly state that union elections held without CNE participation are legally
valid were still pending before the National Assembly at this writing.
Key International Actors
Venezuela’s government has increasingly rejected international monitoring of
its human rights record. In September 2011 the Supreme Court president held
that Venezuela will “respect all international agreements only if … international
bodies respect [Venezuelan] sovereignty and … jurisdiction.”
In September 2011 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that
Venezuela must allow Leopoldo López, a prominent opposition leader, to run
for public office. López, a former Caracas district mayor, has been barred from
seeking elected office by the country’s comptroller general since 2008 due to
corruption allegations for which he has never been formally charged, prosecuted,
or convicted. The court has also found that Venezuela is failing to adopt
measures it ordered to protect individuals facing imminent risks to their lives or
physical integrity.
In October 2011 many governments expressed concern regarding the human
rights situation in Venezuela during the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal
Periodic Review of the country. Venezuela’s government accepted most recommendations
that states made, but rejected several key recommendations aimed
at protecting free speech, strengthening judicial independence, complying with
the Inter-American Court’s binding rulings, and supporting the independent
work of NGOs.