Venezuela
President Hugo Chávez, who has governed Venezuela for 14 years, was elected
to another six-year term in October 2012. During his presidency, the accumulation
of power in the executive branch and the erosion of human rights guarantees
have enabled his government to intimidate, censor, and prosecute
Venezuelans who criticize the president or thwart his political agenda. President
Chávez and his supporters have used their powers in a wide range of cases
involving the judiciary, the media, and human rights defenders.
While many Venezuelans continue to criticize the government, the prospect of
facing similar reprisals—in the form of arbitrary or abusive state action—has
undercut the ability of judges to adjudicate politically sensitive cases, and
forced journalists and rights defenders to weigh the consequences of publicizing
information and opinions that are critical of the government.
Prison violence and police abuse remain serious problems.
Judicial Independence
In 2004, Chávez and his legislative allies conducted a political takeover of the
Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters and creating new measures
that make it possible to purge justices from the court. The court—re-packed
with Chávez supporters in 2010—has largely abdicated its role as a check on
executive power. Its members have openly rejected the principle of separation
of powers and publicly pledged their commitment to advancing the political
agenda of President Chávez. This political commitment has been reflected in the
court’s rulings, which have repeatedly validated the government’s disregard for
international human rights norms.
Individual judges may face reprisals if they rule against government interests. In
December 2009, Judge María Lourdes Afiuni was detained on the day she
authorized the conditional release of a government critic who had spent nearly
three years in prison awaiting trial on corruption charges. Although Afiuni’s ruling
complied with a recommendation by United Nations human rights monitors—
and was consistent with Venezuelan law—she was promptly arrested. A provisional judge who had publicly pledged his loyalty to President Chávez
ordered her to stand trial. The day after her arrest, Chávez publicly branded
Afiuni a “bandit” who should receive the maximum 30 years in prison. Afiuni
spent more than a year in pretrial detention, in deplorable conditions, together
with convicted prisoners—including many she herself had sentenced—who subjected
her to repeated death threats. In the face of growing criticism from international
human rights bodies, Afiuni was moved to house arrest in February
2011, where she remained at this writing while awaiting trial.
Freedom of Media
The Chávez government has expanded and abused its powers to regulate the
media. While sharp criticism of the government is still common in the print
media, on the private TV station Globovisión, and in some other outlets, fear of
government reprisals has made self-censorship a serious problem.
Laws contributing to a climate of self-censorship include amendments to the
criminal code in 2005 extending the scope of desacato laws that criminalize disrespect
of high government officials, and a broadcasting statute allowing arbitrary
suspension of channels for the vaguely defined offense of “incitement.” In
December 2010, the National Assembly broadened this statute to include the
internet. Amendments to the telecommunications law grant the government
power to suspend or revoke concessions to private outlets if it is “convenient for
the interests of the nation.”
The Chávez government has used its regulatory authority to expand the number
of government-run and pro-Chávez media outlets, while reducing the availability
of media outlets that engage in critical programming. Venezuela’s oldest private
television channel, RCTV, which was arbitrarily removed from the public airwaves
in 2007, has since been driven off cable TV by the government, leaving
Globovisión as the only major channel that remains critical of Chávez.
The government has pursued administrative sanctions against Globovisión,
imposing a fine of US$2.1 million in one case for allegedly violating the broadcasting
statute when it aired images of a prison riot in 2011. Another six cases
remain pending against the station, which could lead to another heavy fine, or to its closure or suspension. In addition, the government has targeted media
outlets for sanction and/or censorship for their critical reporting on the government’s
response to issues of public interest.
The government has also targeted other media outlets for arbitrary sanction and
censorship. For example, after the weekly newspaper 6to Poder published a
satirical article in August 2011 depicting six high-level female officials as
dancers in a cabaret entitled, “The Revolution” directed by “Mr. Chávez,” the
paper’s director and president were arrested, and the newspaper received a
court order barring it from publishing text or images that might constitute “an
offense and/or insult to the reputation, or to the decorum, of any representative
of public authorities.”
Human Rights Defenders
The Chávez government has intensified its efforts to marginalize the country’s
human rights defenders by repeatedly accusing them of seeking to undermine
Venezuelan democracy with the support of the United States government. While
some human rights nongovernmental organizations have received funding from
US sources—a common practice among independent groups throughout Latin
America—there is no credible evidence that the independence and integrity of
their work has been compromised as a result.
The weight of the government’s unfounded allegations has been compounded
by Chávez supporters, who have filed multiple criminal complaints against leading
NGOs for receiving foreign funding. In addition, the Supreme Court ruled in
2010 that individuals or organizations that receive foreign funding could be
prosecuted for “treason” under a provision of the criminal code that establishes
a prison sentence of up to 15 years for anyone who “collaborates directly or indirectly
with a foreign country or Republic … or provides or receives money from
them … that could be used against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the
integrity of its territory, its republican institutions, citizens, or destabilizes the
social order.” The National Assembly, moreover, has enacted legislation blocking
organizations that “defend political rights” or “monitor the performance of
public bodies” from receiving international assistance.
These efforts to harass and discredit human rights defenders have contributed
to an environment in which they feel more vulnerable to acts of intimidation by
government officials and violence or threats by its supporters.
The Chávez government has also enacted rules that dramatically reduce the
public’s right to obtain information held by the government. In combination,
these measures have significantly increased the government’s ability to prevent
or deter human rights defenders from obtaining the funding, information, legal
standing, and public visibility they need to be effective advocates.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela, and extrajudicial killings by security
agents remain a grave problem. The minister of the interior and justice has estimated
that police commit one of every five crimes. According to the most recent
official statistics, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people between
January 2000 and the first third of 2009.
Impunity for police abuses remains the norm. In 2011, prosecutors charged individuals
allegedly responsible for abuses in less than 4 percent of cases investigated.
In April 2008, Chávez’s administration issued a decree that established a new
national police force and enacted measures to promote non-abusive policing
proposed by a commission comprised of government and NGO representatives.
At this writing, there had been no independent evaluation of the new police
force’s performance.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained
guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Hundreds of violent prison deaths occur every year. For example, in August
2012, a clash between rival prison gangs in Yare 1 prison, Miranda state, left 24
inmates and one visitor dead and 43 people injured.
Labor Rights
The National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority, has the power to organize
and certify all union elections, violating international standards that guarantee
workers the right to elect their representatives in full freedom, according to
conditions they determine. Established unions whose elections have not been
CNE-certified may not participate in collective bargaining.
For several years, the government has promised to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. In April 2012,
President Chávez adopted a new labor law by decree. Although the law states
that unions are free to organize elections without interference, it lays down the
voting system that unions must incorporate into their statutes, as well as the
maximum length of tenure of union officers. These provisions limit the full freedom
that unions should have under international norms to draw up their constitutions
and rules and elect their representatives.
Key International Actors
Venezuela has increasingly rejected international monitoring of its human rights
record, rejecting binding rulings of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
(IACtHR) and refusing to allow the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) to conduct in-country monitoring of human rights problems. In
September 2012, Venezuela formally announced its withdrawal from the
American Convention on Human Rights.
In March 2012, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted the Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) report of Venezuela. The government has rejected several
key recommendations aimed at protecting free speech, strengthening judicial
independence, complying with the IACtHR’s binding rulings, and supporting the
independent work of NGOs. At this writing, the government had yet to authorize
in-country visits by several UN human rights experts.