Venezuela
After repeatedly winning elections and referendums, and surviving a coup detat
in 2002, President Chvez and his supporters have sought to consolidate power
by undermining the independence of the judiciary and the press, institutions
essential for the protection and promotion of human rights.
State interference in trade union elections has weakened the right to free association.
The government has failed to tackle widespread police abuse, and prison
conditions remain among the worst on the continent. In 2007 fundamental due
process rights, including fair trial rights, were threatened by proposed constitutional
reforms allowing the indefinite suspension of rights during states of emergency.
The reforms were defeated in a national referendum in December.
Independence of the Judiciary
The governing coalition in the Venezuelan National Assembly dealt a severe blow
to judicial independence in December 2004 when it packed the countrys
Supreme Court by adding 12 new justices. A law passed earlier that year expanded
the court from 20 to 32 members. The law also gave the National Assembly the
power to remove judges from the Supreme Court by simple majority, rather than
the two-thirds majority required under the constitution.
Since the 2004 court-packing law, the Supreme Courts judicial commission has
fired hundreds of provisional judges and granted permanent judgeships to
around a thousand others.
Freedom of Expression
While Venezuela enjoys vibrant public debate on political issues, laws passed
since late 2004 have created dangerous restrictions on the media that pose a
serious threat to freedom of expression. The Law of Social Responsibility in Radio
and Television, which went into effect in December 2004, establishes detailed
regulations for the content of television and radio programs. For example, stations
deemed to condone or incite public disturbances or publish messages
contrary to the security of the nation are subject to heavy fines and can be ordered to suspend broadcasting for 72 hours. Key terms in the law, such as
those quoted above, are ill-defined, inviting politically-motivated applications.
The National Commission of Telecommunications (CONATEL) may issue precautionary
measures that prohibit the transmission of outlawed content.
Government officials have regularly threatened opposition media with sanctions
under the Law of Social Responsibility, though no station has in fact been sanctioned
to date for its coverage of events or expressing its political views. During
student protests in May and June 2007, for example, the Directorate of Social
Responsibility (the government body that investigates infractions of the law)
warned stations about transmitting messages that incite hatred and law-breaking,
and announced that the directorate was in permanent session monitoring media
coverage of the protests.
President Chvez has repeatedly responded to critical coverage by threatening
television stations that they would lose their broadcasting rights as soon as their
concessions expired. In the case of Radio Caracas Television (RCTV), he carried
out the threat, announcing at a nationally broadcast military ceremony in
December 2006 that RCTV would not have its concession renewed because of its
support for the 2002 coup. Neither the accusation about the stations role in the
April 2002 events nor its alleged breach of broadcasting standards were ever
proven in a proceeding in which RCTV had an opportunity to present a defense.
RCTV was removed from the public airwaves when its 20-year concession expired
on May 27, 2007. Several days earlier, in compliance with a Supreme Court order,
the military took control of RCTVs transmission facilities across the country,
enabling them to be used by TVes, a newly created state channel. RCTV has since
renewed broadcasting as a cable channel.
The governments administration of broadcasting concessions lacks transparency
and is strongly influenced by political considerations. Other private stations
which have requested permission to extend their frequencies and coverage from
the government broadcasting authority, CONATEL, have had their requests turned
down or ignored for years, while new stations recently created by the state, such
as Vive, Telesur, and TVes, have quickly been approved for national coverage.
In March 2005 amendments to the Criminal Code came into force which extended
the scope of Venezuelas desacato (disrespect) laws, and increased penalties for
criminal defamation and libel. At least eight journalists faced charges in 2007 for
desacato, libel, defamation, and related offenses.
In contrast to its efforts to restrict private media, the government has actively promoted
the growth of nonprofit community broadcast media, and has given substantial
financial backing to new community media ventures. The regulations
include safeguards to protect pluralism and prevent intervention by the government
or political parties in community media. In June 2007 more than 270 community
radio stations and more than 30 community television outlets were
licensed and operating across the country, according to CONATEL.
Freedom of Association
An article of the 1999 Constitution which authorizes the National Electoral
Commission (Comision Nacional Electoral, CNE) to organize trade union elections
is a serious obstacle to freedom of association and collective bargaining rights.
The Ministry of Labor has frequently denied unions the right to represent their
workers because of delays in the authorization of elections.
Police Killings
Extrajudicial killings by security agents remain a frequent occurrence in
Venezuela. Thousands of extrajudicial executions have been recorded in the last
decade. Impunity remains the norm. Between January 2000 and February 2007,
the attorney generals office registered 6,068 alleged killings by the police and
National Guard. Of 1,142 officials charged, only 204 were convicted.
Following several egregious murders implicating police agents, a long overdue
police reform process began in June 2006 when then-Minister of the Interior and
Justice Jesse Chacn convened the National Commission for Police Reform. After
months of broad public consultations and debate, in January 2007 the commission
published recommendations for remodeling public security institutions and
strengthening police oversight. The reforms, however, had yet to be implemented
at this writing.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Venezuelan
Prison Watch (Observatorio Venezolano de Prisiones), a Caracas-based group that
monitors prison conditions, reported 370 violent prison deaths and 781 injuries in
the first eight months of 2007. With a homicide rate of more than 20 per 1,000
prisoners, the risk of violent death is greater inside than outside prison
walls. Weak security and corruption of guards allow armed gangs to effectively
control prisons. Overcrowding, deteriorating infrastructure, and poorly trained
security personnel contribute to the brutal conditions. Despite much fanfare, government
plans to humanize the penitentiary system have not resulted in any
notable improvements.
Constitutional Reform Proposals
In 2007 President Chvez and his supporters in the National Assembly proposed
far-reaching reforms to the Venezuelan constitution. The reforms, which included
69 amendments covering a wide range of issues, would have enhanced executive
powers during states of emergency to allow the suspension of due process rights
(including essential guarantees like the right to fair trial and the presumption of
innocence), removing constitutional time-limits on emergencies, and eliminating
the Supreme Courts power to review decrees that suspend rights.
A positive aspect of the reforms was the proposed modification of the constitutions
nondiscrimination guarantee to include sexual orientation and political
views.
The proposed reforms were narrowly defeated in a national referendum in
December.
Human Rights Defenders
Although human rights advocacy groups operate in Venezuela without legal
restrictions, the government often questions their legitimacy and tries to block
their participation in international human rights fora, typically on grounds that
their work is political or that they receive US or other foreign funding. In December 2006 the comptroller general wrote to the Organization of American
States (OAS) objecting to the publication on the OAS website of a report by the
Venezuelan branch of Transparency International about Venezuelas implementation
of the Inter-American Convention against Corruption. Due to government
objections, Transparency Venezuela was not allowed to present its report at a
meeting of an expert panel of the OAS in June 2007.
Some human rights defenders continue to face threats and intimidation. They
include Mara del Rosario Guerrero Gallucci and her husband, Adolfo Segundo
Martnez Barrios, members of a human rights group in the state of Guarico that
seeks justice for victims of police killings. The two were shot and wounded by a
police agent in April 2006, and reportedly have been subject to repeated death
threats. In July 2006 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered Venezuela
to take special measures to protect their lives and physical integrity.
Key International Actors
In July 2007, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) transmitted
a live hearing on the case of seven people killed during protests that culminated
in the April 11, 2002 coup attempt against President Chvez. At this writing,
Venezuela has still not set a date for a mission by the IACHR, which has not visited
the country since 2002. The government has conditioned the visit on a public
mea culpa by the commission for what officials consider its failure to condemn
the coup in forthright terms.
In May 2007 the presidency of the European Union issued a statement expressing
concern about the non-renewal of RCTVs broadcasting concession. The senates
of Chile, Brazil, and the United States issued similar resolutions, while Cuba,
Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua endorsed the decision.