Venezuela
Venezuelan democracy passed an important test in August 2004 when it
held, in a lawful and peaceful manner, a national referendum to determine
whether President Hugo Chávez should remain in office.
According to election authorities and international observers, a solid
majority of Venezuelans voted in favor of the president’s continued
tenure. But President Chávez and his supporters in the National
Assembly continue to take steps to undermine the independence of the
country’s judiciary and to threaten freedom of the press.
The country’s political polarization has diverted attention from other
pressing human rights issues, including a longstanding problem of
police abuse. Extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects by both state
and municipal police forces are common and all too often go unpunished.
Cases of torture continue to be reported. Violence and anarchy
prevail in many Venezuelan prisons. Refugees from neighboring
Colombia, in areas close to the border, face legal insecurity, difficult living
conditions, and sometimes threats to their lives.
Independence of the Judiciary
In May 2004, President Chávez signed a court-packing law that expands
the number of Supreme Court justices from twenty to thirty-two.
Although the new justices had not been appointed at this writing, the
new law allows the governing coalition to use its slim majority in the
legislature to obtain an overwhelming majority of seats on the country’s
highest court. The law also gives the governing coalition the power to
remove sitting justices by nullifying their appointments.
A political takeover of the Supreme Court would compound the damage
already done to judicial independence by policies pursued by the Court
itself. The Court, which has administrative control over the judiciary,
has failed to grant 80 percent of the country’s judges security of tenure, which is an essential ingredient of judicial independence. In March
2004, three judges were summarily fired after they ordered the release
of people detained during anti-government protests.
Freedom of the Press
Venezuela has a vigorous and uninhibited media. Indeed, as part of the
often heated and acrimonious debate between supporters of the government
and its opponents, members of the media have been able to
express strong views without restriction. Private television companies
have often adopted blatantly partisan positions, airing news and debate
programs extremely hostile to the Chávez government. In response,
many journalists working for media that support the opposition have
been subject to aggression and intimidation by government supporters.
To a lesser degree, journalists working for media sympathetic to the
government have also faced intimidation.
While journalists have a professional responsibility to be objective in
their reporting, it is not the job of government to police such professional
standards. On the contrary, the government has an obligation, no
matter how critical or partisan the reporting, to defend press freedom
by vigorously prosecuting perpetrators of attacks and acts of intimidation.
In the majority of cases, the Chávez government has not done so.
In October 2004, the National Assembly moved to pass a government
bill on the “social responsibility” of radio and television stations that
would impose excessive restrictions on the content of these media. The
draft legislation would introduce an array of restrictions on broadcasting
content that, if enforced rigorously, would infringe upon basic
norms of free expression. Under the guise of protecting children from
crude language, sexual situations, and violence, the proposed law would
subject adults to restrictive and puritanical viewing standards. The proposed
law also contains loosely-worded rules on incitement to violence and threats to public order that could penalize the stations’ legitimate
expression of political views.
In addition, the draft law provides for a regime of drastic punishments
for infractions the likely effect of which would be to encourage pervasive
self-censorship. If found responsible for infractions, the stations
could be fined, ordered to suspend transmissions, or even have their
broadcasting licenses revoked.
Police Killings, Torture, and Ill-treatment
Police continue to carry out extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects.
According to the respected nongovernmental human rights group
PROVEA, 130 people, most of them young male criminal suspects,
were victims of extrajudicial execution by national, state, and municipal
police forces between October 2002 and September 2003. About one in
ten of the victims were children under the age of eighteen. In many
cases, the police covered up executions by asserting that the victims
were killed in exchanges of gunfire, despite contrary testimony by witnesses.
Generally, the police responsible for killings escaped justice.
In early February and late March 2004, National Guard and police officers
beat and tortured people detained during and after protests in
Caracas and other Venezuelan cities. After demonstrators clashed with
National Guard units and Chávez supporters, leaving thirteen people
dead and more than one hundred wounded, security forces detained
more than three hundred civilians. Detainees reported being beaten
during and after their arrests with nightsticks, with the flat side of
sabers, and with helmets, gunstocks, and other articles. Some reported
that their captors hurled tear gas bombs into the closed vehicles in
which they were seated, causing extreme distress, near suffocation, and
panic, while others described how the powder from tear gas canisters
was sprinkled on their faces and eyes, causing burns and skin irritation.
Detainees also reported being shocked with electric batons while in custody and defenseless. The alleged abuses appeared to enjoy official
approval at some level of command in the forces responsible for them.
Prison Conditions
Conditions in Venezuelan prisons are cruel, inhuman, and degrading.
Overcrowding is a chronic problem and prisons are virtually controlled
by armed gangs. Prison riots and inmate violence claim hundreds of
lives every year. In 2003 PROVEA estimated the prison murder rate to
be forty times the national average.
Border Security and the Right to Refugee Status
Lawlessness prevails along parts of Venezuela’s 1,300 mile border with
Colombia. Colombian paramilitaries and guerrillas, as well as
Venezuelan armed groups and criminal gangs, appear to be responsible
for execution-style killings, but so far such groups have operated with
near-complete impunity.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 2,691 people had applied for refugee status in Venezuela by
summer 2004. But UNHCR officials say that the real number of
refugees is far higher since most try to blend undetected into the population.
In February 2004, Venezuela began using a newly-established
asylum application process and in June began providing identification
documents to recognized refugees to enable them to exercise their
rights, including to work, study, and obtain medical treatment.
The Venezuelan National Refugee Commission granted temporary protection
status to 292 indigenous Wayúu who fled to Venezuela in May
2004 following armed violence in their community of Bahia Portete, in
La Guajira, Colombia. It was the first time that the Venezuelan government
has granted this status. The temporary protection is valid for
ninety days and renewable according to the security and protection needs of the group. This status means they can remain in Venezuela and
get government assistance through the National Civil Protection Office.
Key International Actors
The Organization of American States (OAS) played a key role in brokering
the agreement between the government and the political opposition
to find a peaceful and constitutional solution to the political crisis,
helping set the stage for the August 2004 recall referendum. The U.S.-
based Carter Center, along with the OAS, provided international
observers to help ensure that the referendum took place without serious
incident or disruption by partisans on either side. Both the Carter
Center and the OAS validated the official results of the referendum,
concluding that President Chávez had won a legitimate victory.
UNHCR organized a series of training workshops for the army units
that patrol the border and provided officers with instruction on refugee
rights, international refugee law, and the role of the military in refugee
protection. UNHCR also provided the National Refugee Commission
with continuing technical assistance, training, and expertise.