Vietnam
Vietnam intensified its suppression of dissent in 2009 in an effort to bolster the
authority of the Communist Party. Authorities arrested dozens of peaceful democracy
advocates, independent religious activists, human rights defenders, and
online critics, using vaguely-worded national security laws such as spreading
“anti-government propaganda” or “abusing democratic freedoms.” The courts
convicted at least 20 political or religious prisoners in 2009, including five people
sentenced in October whom the previous month the United Nations Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention had determined to be arbitrarily detained. People
imprisoned in Vietnam for the exercise of fundamental rights number more than
400.
The government tightened its controls on internet use, blogging, and independent
research, and banned dissemination and publication of content critical of the
government. Religious freedom continued to deteriorate, with the government targeting
religious leaders—and their followers—who advocated for civil rights, religious
freedom, and equitable resolution of land disputes.
Repression of Political Opposition
In an effort to eliminate challenges to the Communist Party and curb social unrest
in advance of a key June 2009 party plenum, in May the government launched a
wave of arrests, detaining 27 people for alleged links to the banned Democratic
Party of Vietnam (DPV). At least five were prosecuted on national security charges,
including prominent lawyer Le Cong Dinh; their trial is pending at this writing. The
arrests of at least eight other dissidents, bloggers, and political activists followed.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
The government bans independent trade unions and human rights organizations,
as well as opposition political parties. Workers are prohibited from conducting
strikes not authorized by the party-controlled labor confederation. Activists who
promote workers’ rights and independent unions are harassed, arrested, or
jailed.
While government officials often tolerate farmers gathering in Hanoi and Ho Chi
Minh City to file complaints about land confiscation or local corruption, political protests are generally banned. Police crackdowns on protests—especially those in
the countryside—often take place away from the public spotlight. In May, for
example, police dispersed demonstrations in the Mekong delta by ethnic Khmer
farmers protesting land grabbing, and arrested Huynh Ba on charges of organizing
the protests. Since his arrest, he has been held incommunicado in Soc Trang
prison.
Freedom of Religion
Vietnamese law requires that religious groups register with the government and
operate under government-controlled management boards. Adherents of some
unregistered religious groups, as well as religious activists campaigning for internationally-
guaranteed rights, are harassed, arrested, or placed under house
arrest.
In the Central Highlands, authorities in 2009 arrested dozens of Montagnard
Christians accused of belonging to unregistered house churches considered subversive
by the government, planning land rights protests, or conveying information
about rights abuses to activists abroad. A focus of the crackdown was Gia Lai
province, where more than 50 Montagnards were arrested and at least nine sentenced
to prison during the year. On several occasions police beat and shocked
Montagnards with electric batons when they refused to sign pledges to join the
government sanctioned church.
Authorities continued to persecute members of the banned Unified Buddhist
Church of Vietnam, whose supreme patriarch remained under pagoda arrest for
his public criticism of government policies. Other religious activists imprisoned in
Vietnam include Roman Catholic priest Nguyen Van Ly, a Mennonite pastor, and
several Hoa Hao Buddhists.
In July as many as 200,000 Catholics peacefully protested in Quang Binh after
police destroyed a temporary church structure erected near the ruins of an historic
church. Police used teargas and electric batons to beat parishioners, arresting
19, of whom seven were charged with disturbing public order.
In September authorities forcefully expelled more than 300 Buddhist monks and
nuns from a meditation center in Lam Dong established in 2005 with government approval. At least two monks were placed under house arrest after authorities
forced them to return to their home provinces. Authorities took steps to close the
center after its founder, peace activist Thich Nhat Hanh, proposed in 2007 that
the government ease religious freedom restrictions.
Freedom of Expression and Information
The government strictly controls the media. Criminal penalties apply to authors,
publications, websites, and internet users who disseminate information or writings
that oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal state secrets,
or promote “reactionary” ideas.
In 2009 the prime minister issued Decision 97, which prohibits publication of
research that critiques or opposes the government or party, and limits research by
private organizations to 317 government-approved topics. The Institute of
Development Studies, one of Vietnam’s only independent think-tanks, closed in
September, one day before Decision 97 went into effect.
The government controls internet use by monitoring online activity, arresting
cyber-dissidents, and blocking websites of certain human rights and political
groups. Internet cafe owners are required to obtain photo identification from
internet users, and to monitor and store information about their online activities.
A 2008 circular regulating blogs calls for bloggers to limit their postings to personal
content, and bans posting of articles about politics or issues the government
considers state secrets, subversive, or threats to national security and
social order.
Journalists covering controversial topics have been fined, fired, and arrested. In
January 2009 the editors of two leading Vietnamese newspapers that had
exposed a major corruption scandal in 2005 were dismissed from their jobs.
While the government tolerated some public debate about its sensitive relations
with China in 2009, it selectively took punitive measures against commentators
who characterized Vietnam’s China policies as conciliatory, especially regarding
China’s controversial claims to disputed offshore islands and its investment in
Central Highlands bauxite mines. In April authorities suspended publication of Du
Lich newspaper for its critical coverage of China’s territorial disputes with
Vietnam, and in May the paper’s deputy editor was dismissed. In August and September police arrested and briefly detained two bloggers and an internet journalist
on national security charges for articles criticizing China. Also in September
the government fined the editor of the Communist Party’s website for publishing
“unauthorized” information about China training its military in order to defend its
maritime borders with Vietnam.
Criminal Justice System
Police torture is prevalent, particularly during interrogation of political and religious
prisoners, who are typically held incommunicado prior to trial and denied
family visits and access to lawyers. Vietnamese courts lack independence and
impartiality. Political and religious dissidents are often tried without the assistance
of legal counsel in proceedings that fail to meet international fair trial standards.
Lawyers representing political or religious activists face intense harassment and
even arrest, such as Le Cong Dinh. In February 2009 police raided the office of Le
Tran Luat, a lawyer defending Catholics arrested during 2008 prayer vigils in
Hanoi. Authorities confiscated his computer and documents, blocked him from
meeting his clients, and detained and interrogated him to pressure him to drop
the case.
Vietnamese law authorizes arbitrary “administrative detention” without trial.
Under Ordinance 44, dissidents and others deemed national security threats can
be involuntarily committed to mental institutions or detained in state-run “rehabilitation”
centers.
Sex workers, trafficking victims, street children, people who use drugs, and street
peddlers are routinely rounded up and detained without warrants in state rehabilitation
centers. They are subject to beatings, sexual abuse, insufficient food, and
little, if any, access to healthcare, including drug dependency treatment for an
estimated 50,000 people who use drugs who are held in such centers.
Prison conditions are harsh and even life threatening. During pretrial detention—
which can last more than a year—prisoners are often placed in solitary confinement
in dark, cramped, unsanitary cells, with no bedding or mosquito nets.
Convicted prisoners must perform hard labor, sometimes under hazardous conditions.
Key International Actors
Vietnam, which served as president of the UN Security Council in October, made
few efforts to improve its poor rights record or cooperate with UN human rights
mechanisms in 2009, despite significant diplomatic pressure from donors and UN
member states.
During the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review of Vietnam’s
rights record in 2009, Vietnam rejected 45 key recommendations from a broad
range of member states, such as lifting its restrictions on the internet, authorizing
independent media, taking steps to end the practices of torture, arbitrary detention,
and capital punishment, and recognizing the rights of individuals to promote
human rights, conduct peaceful public protests, and express their opinions.
A September report by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention determined
that the government had unlawfully detained 10 dissidents. It criticized penal
code provisions for violating human rights treaties and called for the immediate
release of journalist Truong Minh Duc, currently serving a five-year sentence for
“abusing democratic freedoms.”
Donors pledged more than US$5 million in aid to Vietnam during their annual
meeting in December 2008. During 2009 they raised a wide range of rights concerns
with the government, including arrests of dissidents, censorship of media
and blogs, religious freedom, treatment of ethnic minorities, children’s rights,
administrative detention, and environmental and social impacts of the bauxite
mines.
As Vietnam’s largest export market, the United States focused on developing its
trade, investment, and security relations with Vietnam while exhorting Vietnam to
improve its rights record, particularly in regard to media freedom, criminalization
of peaceful dissent, and restrictions on blogs and independent research. Issues
discussed during a political-military dialogue in 2009 included possible joint
operations against drugs and terrorism.
Japan continued its policy of not overtly criticizing Vietnam’s rights record,
despite its considerable leverage as Vietnam’s largest donor and third-largest
investor. In March Japan resumed aid and loans to Vietnam after suspending
assistance in 2008 over a corruption scandal in one of its projects.