Vietnam
Human rights conditions in Vietnam, already dismal, worsened in 2004.
The government tolerates little public criticism of the Communist
Party or statements calling for pluralism, democracy, or a free press.
Dissidents are harassed, isolated, placed under house arrest, and in
many cases, charged with crimes and imprisoned. Among those singled
out are prominent intellectuals, writers, and former Communist Party
stalwarts.
The government continues to brand all unauthorized religious activities—
particularly those that it fears may be able to attract a large following—
as potentially subversive. Targeted in particular are members
of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam and ethnic minority
Protestants in the northern and central highlands.
Freedom of Expression
Domestic newspapers and television and radio stations remain under
strict government control. Although journalists are occasionally able to
report on corruption by government officials, direct criticism of the
Party is forbidden. Foreign media representatives are required to obtain
authorization from the Foreign Ministry for all travel outside Hanoi.
Several dissidents and democracy activists have been arrested and tried
during the last several years on criminal charges—including espionage
and other vaguely-worded crimes against “national security”—for
peaceful criticism of the government or calling for multi-party reforms.
Legislation remains in force authorizing the arbitrary “administrative
detention” of anyone suspected of threatening national security, with no
need for prior judicial approval.
In July 2004 long-time human rights advocate Nguyen Dan Que, sixtytwo,
was sentenced to thirty months of imprisonment for “abusing democratic freedoms,” for writing an essay, distributed over the Internet,
about state censorship of information and the media. Other cyber-dissidents
who have been sentenced to prison on criminal charges include:
Pham Hong Son, Le Chi Quang, Nguyen Khac Toan, Nguyen Vu
Binh, Pham Que Duong and Tran Khue.
Internet Controls
The government maintains strict control over access to the Internet. It
blocks websites considered objectionable or politically sensitive and
strictly bans the use of the Internet to oppose the government, “disturb”
national security and social order, or offend the “traditional
national way of life.” Decision 71, issued by the Ministry of Public
Security in January 2004, requires Internet users at public cafés to provide
personal information before logging on and has increased the pressure
on Internet café owners to monitor customers’ email messages and
block access to banned websites.
In April 2004 the government closed down Vietnam International News
24-Hour, an unlicensed website that had reprinted a BBC article about
Easter demonstrations in the Central Highlands. In August 2004 the
Ministry of Public Security created a new office to monitor the Internet
for “criminal” content, a measure that appears to be aimed in part at
intimidating people from circulating any information that authorities
could deem to be a “state secret” or otherwise unauthorized.
Freedom of Religion
The government bans independent religious associations and permits
religious activities only insofar as they are conducted by officially-recognized
churches and organizations whose governing boards are approved
and controlled by the government.
A new Ordinance on Beliefs and Religions went into effect in
November 2004. It pays lip service to freedom of religion but strengthens
government controls over religion and bans religious activities
deemed to threaten national security, public order, and national unity.
Members of the banned Mennonite church have come under increasing
pressure from the government. In June 2004, Pastor Nguyen Hong
Quang, an outspoken Mennonite church leader, was arrested after publicly
criticizing the government for detaining four Mennonites three
months earlier. On two separate occasions during 2004, officials in
Kontum province bulldozed a chapel of Pastor Nguyen Cong Chinh,
superintendent of the Mennonite churches in the Central Highlands. In
September, October, and November, police pressured Mennonites in
Kontum and Pleiku provinces to sign forms renouncing their religion.
In both the central and northern highlands, government officials continue
to ban most Protestant gatherings. Authorities have forced ethnic
minority evangelical Christians to pledge to abandon their religion and
cease all political or religious activities in public self-criticism sessions
or by signing written pledges.
Crackdown in the Central Highlands
In the Central Highlands some ethnic minority Christians have rejected
the government-controlled Evangelical Church of Vietnam and have
sought to manage their own religious activities. Increasing numbers of
ethnic minorities, collectively known as Montagnards, appear to be
joining Tin Lanh Dega, or Dega Protestantism, which combines evangelical
Christianity with elements of ethnic pride and aspirations for
self-rule. Dega Protestantism is officially banned by the government.
In April 2004 peaceful demonstrations by Montagnards during Easter
weekend in the Central Highlands turned violent when security forces
and civilians acting on their behalf ambushed and attacked the demonstrators with clubs, metal bars, and other crude weapons. At least ten
Montagnards were killed and dozens wounded. Hundreds fled from
their villages and went into hiding or attempted to flee to Cambodia (see
Cambodia). Authorities dispatched additional police and military forces
to the region and established security checkpoints along the main roads.
Strict restrictions were placed on travel within the highlands, on meetings
of more than two people, and on communication with the outside
world.
Repression of Buddhists
Religious leaders of the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam
(UBCV), which was the largest Buddhist organization in the country
prior to 1975 and which does not recognize the authority of the government-
controlled Vietnam Buddhist Church, face ongoing persecution.
The government appeared to be easing up on the group in early 2003,
when UBCV leader Thich Quang Do was released from two years of
administrative detention and the prime minister visited UBCV Supreme
Patriarch Thich Huyen Quang. However, in October 2003 the two
UBCV leaders were once again placed under unofficial house arrest and
eleven other UBCV leaders were taken into administrative detention.
Tensions escalated in November 2004 when authorities prevented
Thich Quang Do from visiting Thich Huyen Quang, eighty-seven, who
was severely ill in hospital, and summoned him for questioning on allegations
of “appropriating state secrets”.
In March 2004, UBCV dissident Thich Tri Luc (Pham Van Tuong) was
released from prison and resettled in Sweden two months later. Thich
Tri Luc, a UNHCR-recognized refugee, had been abducted by
Cambodian and Vietnamese agents in Cambodia and taken to Vietnam
in 2002.
Members of the Hoa Hao sect of Buddhism are subject to police surveillance
and several were thought to remain in detention at this writing. The sect was granted official status in May 1999, although government
appointees dominated the Hoa Hao Buddhism Representative
Committee established at that time. In August 2004 Hoa Hao leader Le
Quang Liem, eighty-four, was released from administrative detention
after more than two years’ under house arrest.
Religious Prisoners
At this writing, at least ten ethnic Hmong Christians were in detention
in Lai Chau and Ha Giang provinces in the north. More than 124
Montagnard Christians continue to serve prison sentences of up to
twelve years for their involvement in church activities or public demonstrations,
or for attempting to seek asylum in Cambodia. Six
Mennonites are serving prison terms ranging from nine months to three
years for “resisting officers on duty,” after a half-day trial in November
2004. At least four Catholics, including Father Nguyen Van Ly and
members of the Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix, remain in
prison for expressing criticism of Vietnam’s human rights record or for
distributing religious books and holding training courses.
Torture in Detention
Prison conditions in Vietnam are extremely harsh. Human Rights
Watch has received reports of solitary confinement of detainees in
cramped, dark, unsanitary cells; lack of access to medical care; and of
police beating, kicking, and using electric shock batons on detainees.
Police officers routinely arrest and detain suspects without written warrants,
and authorities regularly hold suspects in detention for more than
a year before they are formally charged or tried.
Political trials are closed to the international press corps, the public, and
often the families of the detainees themselves. Defendants do not have
access to independent legal counsel. More than one hundred death sentences
were issued in 2004, with twenty-nine crimes considered capital offenses under the penal code, including murder, armed robbery, drug
trafficking, many economic crimes, and some sex offenses.
Key International Actors
At the December 2003 Consultative Group meeting, Vietnam’s international
donors pledged more than U.S.$2.8 billion in aid for 2004. While
donors publicly have focused on economic growth, “good governance,”
and poverty reduction programs, they have increasingly expressed concerns
about the government’s imprisonment of dissidents, suppression
of freedom of expression and of religion, and its poor handling of the
crisis in the Central Highlands.
In June 2004 Japan, Vietnam’s largest donor, reversed its traditionally
circumspect stance on Vietnam’s record on human rights and
announced that its official development assistance to Vietnam would be
linked in part to the government’s respect for human rights and steps
toward democracy. In contrast, fellow members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) made virtually no comment on
Vietnam’s human rights record.
The E.U. has criticized Vietnam’s decision to classify information and
statistics on executions as a state secret. More than 100 members of the
European Parliament called on the E.U. and European Commission to
highlight Vietnam’s human rights record during the Asia-Europe
Summit Meeting held in Hanoi in October 2004. During the meetings
the Dutch Foreign Minister, on behalf of the E.U., called for the release
of political and religious prisoners. In November, the U.K. Foreign
Office raised concerns about the plight of non-recognized Buddhist and
Protestant groups in its annual human rights report.
The U.S. re-established diplomatic relations with Vietnam in 1995 and
approved a bilateral trade agreement with Vietnam in 2001. In 2001 and
again in 2004, the U.S. House of Representatives approved the Vietnam
Human Rights Act, which would link future increases in non-humanitarian
aid to progress on human rights. As of this writing the Senate had
not approved the legislation. In 2003 the U.S. State Department cancelled
its annual human rights dialogue with Vietnam because of lack of
concrete results. In September 2004 the State Department designated
Vietnam a “Country of Particular Concern” because of what it called
Vietnam’s “particularly severe violations of religious freedom.”
In July 2004 Vietnam became of one fifteen countries, and the first and
only Asian country, to receive financial aid from U.S. President George
W. Bush’s emergency global plan for HIV/AIDS. In November, the
deputy director of UNAIDS called on Vietnam to address continuing
discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS, which she said was
among the worst in the world.
In November 2004 the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
stated that the imprisonment of Nguyen Dan Que was arbitrary and in
violation of international law.