Vietnam
Vietnam’s tenth Communist Party (VCP) Congress saw a significant turnover in the
Politburo, as younger members replaced key aging party veterans. New faces,
however, did not bring significant improvement in human rights practices.
Despite having one of Asia’s highest growth rates, Vietnam’s respect for fundamental
human rights continues to lag behind many other countries, and the oneparty
state remains intolerant of criticism.
Hundreds of political and religious prisoners remain behind bars in harsh conditions.
During 2006 the government released a handful of prisoners of conscience
but arrested dozens more, including democracy activists, cyber-dissidents, and
ethnic minority Christians.
Authorities continue to persecute members of independent churches, impose
controls over the internet and the press, restrict public gatherings, and imprison
people for their religious and political views. Media, political parties, religious
organizations, and labor unions are not allowed to exist without official oversight,
or to take actions considered contrary to Party policies.
The year saw unprecedented labor unrest, official efforts to muzzle an emerging
democracy movement, and ongoing repression of Buddhists and ethnic minority
Christians.
Labor
The year began with a series of wildcat strikes by thousands of workers at foreignowned
factories and those with heavy foreign investment around Ho Chi Minh
City. They demanded wage increases and better working conditions. The strikes
quickly spread to the central and northern provinces, but died down when the
government increased the minimum wage at foreign-owned companies to US $54
a month—a 40 percent increase, and the first since 1999.
Democracy Movement
In April 2006 more than 100 people publicly signed an “Appeal for Freedom of
Political Association” and a “Manifesto for Freedom and Democracy.” The initiators
of the movement (called the 8406 Bloc, after the date of the Manifesto)
included Father Nguyen Van Ly, dissident Hoang Minh Chinh, and writer Do Nam
Hai. By August, more than 2,000 people had signed the public appeals.
In October, activists announced the creation of an independent labor union as an
alternative to the party-controlled labor confederation. Dissidents also launched
several unsanctioned independent publications during 2006, including Tu Do
Ngon Luan (“Freedom of Expression”) and Tu Do Dan Chu (“Freedom and
Democracy”).
The government responded by detaining and interrogating many of the more
prominent activists and confiscating their documents, computers, and cell
phones (see below).
Free Expression and the Internet
Vietnam’s Law on Publications strictly bans publications that oppose the government,
divulge state secrets, or disseminate “reactionary” ideas. There are few privately-
owned media outlets; most publications are published by the government,
the Party, or Party-controlled organizations. In 2006 the state media, which have
usually been allowed to write about corruption, covered the embezzlement of
government and donor funds by transportation ministry officials.
The government blocks websites considered objectionable or politically sensitive,
monitors email and online forums, and makes internet cafe owners responsible
for information accessed and transferred on the internet by their customers.
A new law, Decree No. 56, “Administrative Sanctions on Information and Culture
Activities,” calls for steep fines for activities such as circulating “harmful” information,
defaming the nation and national heroes, or revealing “party secrets,
state secrets, military secrets and economic secrets.”
Repression of Dissent
Activists who launch unsanctioned publications or use the internet to disseminate
opinions critical of the government are harassed, detained, and imprisoned.
At this writing, at least two cyber-dissidents remained in prison.
Nguyen Vu Binh is serving a seven-year sentence for espionage for his internet
postings, testimony submitted in writing to the US Congress on human rights,
and communication with activists inside Vietnam and abroad.
Truong Quoc Huy, detained in 2005 for more than eight months after participating
in internet discussions about democracy, was re-arrested in an internet cafe on
August 18, 2006. He had reportedly expressed public support for the democracy
movement.
In mid-April two journalists were detained at Ho Chi Minh City airport and prevented
from attending a conference in Manila on free expression in Asian cyberspace.
On April 20 police arrested two Montagnard students and held them for 18 days
in a district prison in Dak Lak, where they were beaten, interrogated, and accused
of using the internet to send lists of political prisoners to advocacy groups
abroad.
On June 30 police raided the home of dissident Nguyen Thanh Giang and confiscated
books and documents. On August 12 police raided the homes of five dissidents,
including Nguyen Khac Toan, Nguyen Van Dai, and Hoang Tien, as they prepared
to launch an independent publication. In October Do Nam Hai and two
other dissidents were called for “working sessions” with the police.
US citizen Cong Thanh Do (Tran Nam), a representative of the People’s Democracy
Party, was arrested on August 14. Upon Do’s expulsion from Vietnam on
September 21, the state press said he had been arrested for disseminating antigovernment
information. At this writing, six Vietnamese arrested in August
because of alleged links to the People’s Democracy Party remained in detention.
In November, four Vietnamese and three Vietnamese-Americans arrested in 2005 were sentenced to fifteen months’ imprisonment, or time served, on terrorism
charges, for allegedly smuggling radio equipment in to Vietnam.
Suspected democracy movement supporters Truong Quoc Huy and three others
arrested in August — Nguyen Ngoc Quang, Vu Hoang Hai, and Pham Ba Hai —
were charged with conducting anti-government propaganda.
Assembly
Public demonstrations are rare, especially after government crackdowns against
mass protests in the Central Highlands in 2001 and 2004. Decree 38, signed by
the prime minister in 2005, banned public gatherings in front of places where
government, Party, and international conferences are held, and requires organizers
to obtain government permission in advance.
In advance of the Party Congress in April 2006 and President Bush’s visit in
November, police in Hanoi rounded up street children and homeless people and
sent them to compulsory “rehabilitation” centers on the outskirts of the city
where some were badly beaten. Soldiers were dispatched to villages in the
Central Highlands to prevent possible demonstrations during Bush’s visit.
Religion
Vietnam’s 2004 Ordinance on Beliefs and Religions affirms the right to freedom of
religion. However, it requires that all religious groups register with the government
in order to be legal, and bans any religious activity deemed to cause public
disorder, harm national security, or “sow divisions.”
Followers of some religions not officially recognized by the government continue
to be persecuted. Security officials disperse their religious gatherings, confiscate
religious literature, and summon religious leaders to police stations for interrogation.
Buddhist monks from the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV),
including its Supreme Patriarch, Thich Huyen Quang, and second-ranking leader,
Thich Quang Do, remain confined to their monasteries.
Despite regulations to streamline the registration process, hundreds of Christian
house church organizations that tried to register in 2006 were either rejected outright,
ignored, or had their applications returned unopened. These included 500
ethnic minority churches in the Northwest Highlands. In the Central Highlands,
some Montagnard churches linked to the government-approved Evangelical
Church of Vietnam (ECVN) were reportedly able to register. However Montagnards
belonging to unregistered Christian churches came under heavy pressure to join
the ECVN or recant their beliefs, despite a 2005 decree banning such practices.
In May, fifty police officers raided the home and church of Mennonite pastor Rev.
Nguyen Hong Quang and demolished repair work he had done to the Mennonite
church building. Quang, a former political prisoner, was one of the signatories of
the Bloc 8406 manifesto.
Even registered groups face problems. More than fifty monks and nuns from the
officially-recognized Vietnam Buddhist Church (VBC) demonstrated in July 2006 to
protest the unfair imprisonment and torture of eight Buddhists and the beating to
death in custody of a monk. The case, which was heard on appeal at Bac Giang
Provincial People’s Court in June 2006, resulted in their temporary release.
Prisons and Torture
Hundreds of religious and political prisoners remain in prisons throughout
Vietnam. They include more than 350 Montagnards who have been sentenced to
prison terms since 2001, largely for peaceful political or religious activities, or trying
to seek asylum in Cambodia.
There is compelling evidence of torture and other mistreatment of detainees.
Prisoners are reportedly placed in solitary confinement in cramped, dark, unsanitary
cells; and beaten, kicked, and shocked with electric batons.
Police officers routinely arrest and detain suspects without written warrants. Trials
of dissidents are closed to the public, media, and detainees’ families. Under
Administrative Detention Decree 31/CP, individuals can be put under house arrest
for alleged national security crimes for up to two years without going before a
judge.
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s donors, including the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and Japan
raised strong concerns when news broke in January about major embezzlement of
donor funds by the transportation ministry, which resulted in the resignation and
arrest of several ministry officials.
While noting political prisoner releases, the EU, Vietnam’s largest donor, placed
Vietnam on its list of countries of concern in its human rights report for 2006. In
May, a European Parliament delegation to Vietnam called for the release of prisoners
of conscience, free access for the international press to the Central
Highlands, and an end to the death penalty. In September, the United Kingdom
praised Vietnam’s progress on poverty reduction but said it would link ongoing
aid to progress on human rights, anti-corruption, good governance, and financial
reform.
Relations with the United States reached an unprecedented high in 2006, with
the resumption of its human rights dialogue, which had been suspended since
2002, and the visit of President George Bush in November. The US removed its
designation of Vietnam as a Country of Particular Concern (CPC) for religious freedom
violations, and it was expected that by the end of the year the US would
grant Vietnam “Permanent Normalized Trade Relations.”