V@<KE8D
The Vietnamese government systematically suppresses freedom of expression,
association, and peaceful assembly. Independent writers, bloggers, and rights
activists who question government policies, expose official corruption, or call
for democratic alternatives to one-party rule are routinely subject to police
harassment and intrusive surveillance, detained incommunicado for long periods
of time without access to legal counsel, and sentenced to increasingly long
terms in prison for violating vague national security laws.
Police frequently torture suspects to elicit confessions and, in several cases,
have responded to public protests over evictions, confiscation of land, and
police brutality with excessive use of force. Anti-China protests in Hanoi and Ho
Chi Minh City in 2011 were dispersed and protesters were intimidated,
harassed, and in some cases detained for several days.
The 11th Vietnam Communist Party Congress in January 2011 and the stage-managed
National Assembly election in May determined the leadership of the party
and government for the next five years. During both, there was no sign of any
serious commitment to improve Vietnam’s abysmal human rights record. Prime
Minister Nguyen Tan Dung began his second term in July, enjoying strong support
from the Ministry of Public Security and other hard-liners.
Repression of Dissent
2011 saw a steady stream of political trials and arrests, likely spurred in part by
Vietnamese government concerns that pro-democracy Arab Spring movement
might reach Asia.
During the first 10 months of 2011, the authorities sent at least 24 rights
activists to prison. All but one were convicted of “conducting propaganda
against the state” (penal code article 88), “undermining national unity” (article
87), or “subversion of the administration” (article 79). These three vaguely
defined articles have been employed to imprison hundreds of peaceful activists
in the last decade. In addition, the police arrested at least 27 political and religious
advocates in 2011. Blogger Nguyen Van Hai, known by his pen name DieuCay, has been held incommunicado since October 2010. Two other pro-democracy
internet writers, Nguyen Ba Dang and Phan Thanh Hai, have been detained
since 2010 without trial.
In a major trial in April 2011, prominent legal activist Dr. Cu Huy Ha Vu was convicted
of conducting propaganda against the state and sentenced to seven
years in prison. The sentence was upheld on appeal.
In May the People’s Court of Ben Tre convicted seven peaceful land rights
activists, including Mennonite pastor Duong Kim Khai and Hoa Hao Buddhist
member Tran Thi Thuy, for subversion and sentenced them to long prison terms.
Authorities continue to harass, interrogate, and in some cases detain and
imprison online critics. In January 2011 police arrested human rights blogger Ho
Thi Bich Khuong. In May democracy advocate Nguyen Kim Nhan was arrested
for allegedly conducting propaganda against the state, five months after he was
released from prison on the same charge. In August blogger Lu Van Bay was
sentenced to four years for his pro-democracy articles published on the
Internet. Also in August blogger Pham Minh Hoang was sentenced to three
years for subversion.
Ethnic minority activists also face arrest and imprisonment. In January the Lang
Son provincial court sentenced blogger Vi Duc Hoi, an ethnic Tay, on charges of
conducting propaganda against the state to eight years in prison, reduced to
five years on appeal in April. In March land rights activist Chau Heng, a member
of the Khmer Krom minority group, was sentenced to two years in prison in An
Giang on charges of “destruction of property” and “causing public disorder.”
The People’s Court of Gia Lai imprisoned eight Montagnard Protestants in April
to sentences between eight to twelve years for violating article 87 of the penal
code, which outlaws “undermining unity policy.”
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Information
The government does not allow independent or privately-owned domestic
media to operate and exerts strict control over the press and internet. Criminal
penalties apply to authors, publications, websites, and internet users who disseminate
materials deemed to oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal state secrets, or promote “reactionary” ideas. The government
blocks access to politically sensitive websites, requires internet cafe owners to
monitor and store information about users’ online activities, and subjects independent
bloggers and online critics to harassment and pressure.
In August anti-China protests in Hanoi were dispersed with force. Protesters
were intimidated, harassed, and detained for peacefully marching near the
Embassy of China and around Hoan Kiem lake. Government media, including
newspapers and television stations, continually cast negative images of protesters
and labeled them “reactionary.”
Freedom of Religion
The government restricts religious practices through legislation, registration
requirements, and harassment and surveillance. Religious groups are required
to register with the government and operate under government-controlled management
boards. Despite allowing many government-affiliated churches and
pagodas to hold worship services, the government bans any religious activity
that it arbitrarily deems to oppose “national interests,” harm national unity,
cause public disorder, or “sow divisions.”
Local police continue to prohibit unsanctioned Buddhist Hoa Hao groups from
commemorating the anniversary of the death of Hoa Hao founder Huynh Phu
So. During Buddhist festivals in May and August, Da Nang police blocked
access to Giac Minh and An Cu pagodas and intimidated Buddhist followers.
Both pagodas are affiliated with the un-sanctioned Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam.
Protestant pastor Nguyen Trung Ton was arrested in January on unknown
charges. Three Catholic Ha Mon Montagnard activists—Blei, Phoi, and Dinh
Pset—were arrested in March. Two Cao Dai activists, Nguyen Van Lia and Tran
Hoai An, were arrested in April and July. Also in April Protestant pastor Nguyen
Cong Chinh was arrested and charged with “undermining national unity.” At
least 15 Catholics affiliated with Redemptorist churches in Hanoi and Ho Chi
Minh City, including bloggers Le Van Son and Ta Phong Tan, were arrested in
July, August, and September.
In July prominent religious and democracy campaigner Father Nguyen Van Ly
was sent back to prison after approximately 16 months of medical
parole/house arrest. Father Ly suffers from partial paralysis resulting from
strokes previously suffered in prison and there continue to be serious concerns
for his health.
Criminal Justice System
Police brutality, including torture and fatal beatings, continues to be reported in
all regions of the country. At least 13 people died in police custody within the
first 10 months of 2011.
Political and religious detainees and others whose cases are considered sensitive
are frequently tortured during interrogation, held incommunicado prior to
trial, and denied family visits and access to lawyers. Vietnamese courts remain
under the firm control of the government and the Vietnam Communist party,
and lack independence and impartiality. Political and religious dissidents are
often tried without the assistance of legal counsel in proceedings that fail to
meet international fair trial standards. Defense lawyers who take on politically
sensitive cases are intimidated, harassed, debarred, and imprisoned.
Vietnamese law continues to authorize arbitrary “administrative detention”
without trial. Under Ordinance 44 (2002) and Decree 76 (2003), peaceful dissidents
and others deemed threats to national security or public order can be
involuntarily committed to mental institutions, placed under house arrest, or
detained in state-run “rehabilitation” or “re-education” centers.
People dependent on illegal drugs can be held in government detention centers
where they are subjected to “labor therapy,” the mainstay of Vietnam’s
approach to drug treatment. In early 2011 there were 123 centers across the
country holding some 40,000 people, including children as young as 12. Their
detention is not subject to any form of due process or judicial oversight and
routinely lasts for as long as four years. Infringement of center rules—including
the work requirement—is punished by beatings with truncheons, shocks with
electrical batons, and being locked in disciplinary rooms where detainees are
deprived of food and water. Former detainees report being forced to work in cashew processing and other forms of agricultural production, including potato
or coffee farming; construction work; and garment manufacturing and other
forms of manufacturing, such as making bamboo and rattan products. Under
Vietnamese law, companies who source products from these centres are eligible
for tax exemptions. Some products produced as a result of this forced labor
made their way into the supply chain of companies who sell goods abroad,
including to the United States and Europe.
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s complicated relationship with China plays a key role in both domestic
and foreign affairs. Domestically, the government has been increasingly criticized
on nationalist grounds by many activists and some retired military officials
for weak responses to what is widely seen in Vietnam as China’s aggressive
behavior in the disputed Spratly and Paracel Islands. The government in
2011 worked to silence this increasingly public and audible anti-China chorus.
Internationally, the government has attempted to increase cooperation with the
US, India, Japan, and neighboring Association of Southeast Asian Nations countries
as a regional counter-balance China’s influence.
Despite Japan’s considerable leverage as Vietnam’s largest bilateral donor, it
has repeatedly failed to publicly comment on Vietnam’s deteriorating rights
record.
The relationship between Vietnam and the US continues to grow closer. In
September Vietnam opened a new consulate in New York, and the US
Consulate in Ho Chi Minh City expanded with the opening of an American
Center. The US and Vietnam are also among those currently negotiating to join
the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a multilateral free trade agreement.
In January and May United Nations independent experts who had visited
Vietnam in 2010 published their findings. The UN special rapporteur on human
rights and extreme poverty issued a broadly positive report but urged the government
to ratify and implement major human rights treaties, including the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment.
The UN special rapporteur on minority issues issued a more critical report, acknowledging some progress but raising concerns about the potential denial
of religious freedom and “other serious violations of civil rights.” The rapporteur
also pointedly noted that obstacles during her visit “impeded her ability to
obtain perspectives other than those in consonance with official Government
positions.”