Whose News?:
The Changing Media Landscape and NGOs
By Carroll Bogert
These are tough times for foreign correspondents. A combination of rapid
technological change and economic recession has caused deep cuts in the
budget for foreign reporting at many Western news organizations. Plenty of exforeign
correspondents have lost their jobs, and many others fear for their
jobs and their futures. Consumers of news, meanwhile, are watching international
coverage shrink in the pages of major papers. One recent study estimated
that the number of foreign news stories published prominently in newspapers
in the United Kingdom fell by 80 percent from 1979 to 2009.1 The
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that 20
out of its 31 member states face declining newspaper readerships;2 since foreign
reporting is expensive, it is often the first to be cut.
While changes in the media world may be hard on journalists and unsettling
for news consumers, they also have very significant implications for international
NGOs such as Human Rights Watch. Foreign correspondents have
always been an important channel for international NGOs to get the word out,
and a decline in global news coverage constitutes a threat to their effectiveness.
At the same time, not all the implications of this change are bad. These
are also days of opportunity for those in the business of spreading the word.
This essay attempts to examine the perils and possibilities for international
NGOs3 in these tectonic shifts in media.
Of course NGOs of all kinds accomplish a great deal without any recourse to
the media at all. Human rights activists pursue much of their mission outside
the public eye: private meetings with diplomats; closed-door policy discussions
with government officials; strategy sessions with other NGOs; and, of course, interviews with victims and eyewitnesses whose identity and safety
must be protected from the glare of publicity. NGOs that do research in the
field may share a close bond with journalists, but research is only part of their
overall mission of effecting social change.
Not all NGOs deal regularly with foreign correspondents; in fact, quite the
opposite. Most NGO activists are working inside their own national borders. If
the local media are at least somewhat free, they are likely to be more focused
on national coverage. The international or regional media may serve as an
additional form of pressure on the activists’ own government, but changes in
the funding and composition of foreign correspondents will not always have a
significant impact on their work.
NGOs have a complex and ambivalent relationship with journalists. They work
at a different pace from the media, take a considerably longer time to publish
their findings, and feel far removed from the feeding frenzies and 15-minute
celebrities that often dominate commercial media. They frequently feel that in
the rush of the news cycle, key facts may get forgotten or taken out of context,
and the headline-grabbing aspects of the story may not be the most meaningful
or important angles for their own advocacy.
At the same time, with a few exceptions, NGOs are constantly seeking greater
media attention for their work. The changing media landscape presents new
challenges and possibilities for such groups, particularly those that view international
media as an important channel for getting their message out.
NGOs and Foreign Correspondents: A Symbiosis
One of the most potent tools of international human rights NGOs has always
been “naming and shaming,” or publicizing specific human rights violations
and identifying those responsible. Its usefulness can be measured in part by
the resources governments mobilize to combat it. At the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva, for example, government delegations conduct
extensive diplomatic campaigns to avoid being publicly censured.
Bad publicity can help spark government action. When a video surfaced in
October 2010 showing two Papuan farmers being tortured by Indonesian soldiers,
the Indonesian government clearly felt pressure to act. United States
President Barack Obama was scheduled for a visit that month and neither government
wanted the torture issue to dominate the headlines. The Indonesian
government, which has been notoriously reluctant to punish its soldiers for
human rights abuses, promptly tried and convicted four soldiers of torture.4 It
was clearly responding to media pressure in doing so.
For groups that do not enjoy extensive grass-roots support or mass membership,
media coverage may act as a kind of stand-in for public pressure. In very
few countries, and relatively rare circumstances, does the public become seriously
mobilized over an issue of foreign policy. To be sure, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has the capacity to rally global publics outside the
region–on both sides–and so does the use of US military power abroad. The
Save Darfur campaign brought hundreds of thousands of students and other
supporters to street demonstrations. But those are exceptions. In general, foreign
affairs pique the interest of a narrow subsection in any society. Extensive
media coverage of an issue may help to affect policy even when the public
remains silent on the issue. Serbian atrocities in Kosovo at the end of the
1990’s comes to mind; significant public debate, in the media and elsewhere,
helped generate pressure on NATO policymakers to take action.
Media coverage can also act as an informal “stamp of approval” for international
advocacy groups. When a prominent publication cites an NGO official in
a story, it signifies that the reporter, who is supposed to be knowledgeable
about the issue, has determined the NGO to be credible. When an NGO
spokesperson appears on a well-regarded television show, she may thereafter carry greater weight with the policymakers she is trying to reach. Her very
access to the media megaphone makes her a bigger threat, and a person to
be reckoned with.
If advocacy groups need the media, it is clear that media need them, too. In
many countries where the press corps is not fully free, journalists rely on international
groups to say things that they cannot. In Bahrain, for example, the
ruling family promotes itself as reformist but it would have been very difficult
for the one independent local newspaper there to report extensively on
renewed use of torture during police interrogations. The fact of this resurgence
was widely alleged by activists and detainees, but considered too sensitive to
publicize locally.5 When Human Rights Watch published a report on the issue,5
the local independent newspaper covered the issue extensively, reproducing
much of the report in its pages without major fear of retribution.
Foreign correspondents working in repressive countries do not face the same
consequences that local journalists do when they report on human rights or
social justice issues. But they, too, may pull their punches in order to avoid
problems with their visas or accreditation. Quoting an NGO making critical
comments is safer than doing so oneself.
Some journalists feel a strong bond of kinship with NGOs that work on political
repression and abuse of power. Whether it was Washington Post correspondents
Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein bringing the Watergate crimes to
light, or the international press corps covering the wars in the former
Yugoslavia, journalists are often driven by the desire to expose the crimes of
political leaders and see justice done.
Whose Sky is Falling?
Paradoxically, it is precisely in wealthier countries where the media are sickest
today. In the United States, the triple blow of the internet, the economic recession, and the poor management of a few major newspapers has dramatically
shrunk the cadre of foreign correspondents. Several daily papers, such as the
Boston Globe and Newsday, have shut down their foreign bureaus entirely.
Television networks have closed almost all of their full-fledged bureaus, leaving
local representatives in a handful of capitals. The New York Times and The
Washington Post, the reigning monarchs of international coverage, appear to
maintain their foreign bureaus more out of the personal commitment of the
families who still own them. In the United States, at least, the commercial
model for international fact-gathering and distribution is evidently broken.
No one is more vocal about the dire consequences of these cutbacks than the
newspapers’ foreign correspondents themselves. Pamela Constable, a
respected foreign correspondent for The Washington Post, wrote in 2007: “If
newspapers stop covering the world, I fear we will end up with a microscopic
elite reading Foreign Affairs and a numbed nation watching terrorist bombings
flash briefly among a barrage of commentary, crawls, and celebrity gossip.”6
As The New York Times’ chief foreign correspondent said: “When young men
ask me for advice on how to become a foreign correspondent, I tell them:
‘Don’t.’ It is like becoming a blacksmith in 1919–still an honorable and skilled
profession; but the horse is doomed.”7
But the correspondent, C.L. Sulzberger, made that comment in 1969. Every age
laments its own passing, and old foreign correspondents are no exception. It
is not entirely clear that the American public, or the public in any of the countries
where foreign correspondents are in decline, is less well-informed than it
used to be. At least one study has shown, in fact, that the American public is
roughly as informed about international affairs as it was 20 years ago, before
the big declines in traditional sources of foreign reporting.8 And overall, even
among Western publics, media consumption is increasing.9
Meanwhile, in countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, and others,
the internet is allowing the public to get foreign news without government filters–
an important advance in their knowledge of the world.10 And the OECD
has estimated that, while readership of newspapers is declining among most
of its members, that decline is more than offset by the overall growth in the
newspaper industry globally.11
A number of media outlets from the global South have greatly enhanced their
international presence in recent years. Al-Jazeera and al-Jazeera English,
financed by the emir of Qatar, report on a wide range of global news, although
the network has recently cut back one of its four international broadcasting
centers. Others are not so free-wheeling. Xinhua, the state-run news agency of
China, and other Chinese media organizations such as CCTV, are loathe to run
much human rights news–and are positively allergic to such news out of China
or its allies.
A Peril and a Boon
The information revolution made possible by the internet represents both a
peril and a boon to international NGOs grappling with the decline in Western
media reporting on foreign news. On the one hand, the plethora of online publications,
blogs, Facebook, and Twitter feeds, cable and satellite television stations,
and other forms of new media is clamorous and confusing. How are
advocacy groups to know which media are important? If one purpose of getting
media coverage, as laid out above, is to reach policymakers, how does
one ascertain which media they are consuming? Previously, in most countries,
a couple of daily papers, a weekly magazine or two, and a few radio and television
broadcasts constituted the core of what critical decision-makers in government
were likely to get their news from. Nowadays their reading habits are
not so easy to guess. The audience for international news has fractured.
A 2008 study by graduate students at Columbia University asked a range of
officials associated with the UN in New York what media they read, listened to,
and watched. Unsurprisingly, nearly three-quarters of those surveyed said they
read The New York Times every day. Fifty percent read The Economist–also no
surprise. But a significant number of respondents said they were also reading
the frequent postings of a blogger at the Inner City Press, who covers UN affairs
closely but is virtually unknown outside the UN community.12
The internet poses the challenge of the glut. Advocacy groups, after all, not
only seek media coverage but also respond to media queries. Which questioners
are worthy of the scarce attentions of an NGO? Which bloggers are merely
cranks who will waste an inordinate amount of staff time while offering little
impact? And how does one tell the difference? And how much time should an
NGO spend poring through the latest data-dump from Wikileaks?
But then there is the boon. The same internet that has blown a gaping hole in
media budgets is also allowing NGOs to reach their audiences directly.
Technologies that were once the exclusive preserve of a professional class are
now widely available. Taking a photograph of a policeman beating up a
demonstrator and transmitting the image to a global audience used to involve
expensive equipment and access to scarce transmission technology. Only a
handful of trained journalists could do it. Now the same picture can be taken
and transmitted with a US$35 mobile phone. During Egypt’s parliamentary
elections in late November 2010, for example, the government rejected international
observers and drastically restricted local monitors. But NGO activists
managed to film a local mayor affiliated with the ruling party filling out multiple
ballots and, in another place, plainclothes men with sticks disrupting a
polling station.
Picking Up the Slack?
For NGOs with large field presences–and even for those with only an occasional
investigator or representative overseas–the ability to generate and distribute
content is potentially revolutionary. But it requires more than taking a cellphone
photograph of a news event and posting it to Facebook. The question is
whether NGOs will operate systematically in the vacuum left by the commercial
media. To do so will require re-purposing the information they are already
gathering, and acquiring the skills to reach the public directly with features
capable of attracting public attention. At present not many NGOs have the
resources to reconfigure their research and information into user-friendly content.
Most of them operate on the written word. Often they are addressing
other experts rather than the public at large. Importantly, they generally have
precious little visual information to illustrate their findings.
That is beginning to change. Human Rights Watch assigns professional photographers,
videographers, and radio producers to work in the field alongside
its researchers, documenting in multimedia features what the researchers are
documenting in words.13
Amnesty International is creating an autonomous “news unit,” staffed with
five professional journalists, to generate human rights news. Medecins Sans
Frontieres also uses photography and video extensively, while the Natural
Resources Defense Council is assigning journalists to write about environmental
issues.
Even if NGOs are able to produce user-friendly content, the question remains
of how to distribute it. An NGO can post content on its website, and reach a
few thousand people, perhaps tens of thousands. Distributing via Facebook,
Twitter, YouTube, and other social media might garner a few thousand more.
Content that “goes viral” and reaches millions of people remains the rare
exception. Sooner or later the question of distribution returns to the mainstream media, whose audiences still dwarf those of the non-profit sector. Will
they distribute content produced by NGOs?
With budgets for foreign news in decline, one might expect editors and producers
to be grateful for the offer of material from non-profit sources. But that
is not always the case, and the answer depends on the country, the media
outlet, and the NGO. The BBC, for example, rarely takes material from advocacy
groups for broadcast. CBS, in the US, recently tightened up its regulations
for taking content from outside sources.14 Time magazine will not accept
images from a photographer whose assignment was underwritten by an NGO.
And many media commentators, writing on the rising importance of NGOs as
information producers, are wary of the trend. “While journalists–if sometimes
imperfectly–work on the principle of impartiality, the aid agency is usually
there to get a message across: to raise money, to raise awareness, to change a
situation.”15
Issues of Objectivity and Neutrality
NGOs like Human Rights Watch do not present facts for the sake of reporting
the news but to inform the public and advocate on behalf of victims of abuse.
That sets their work apart from traditional journalism and raises the very
important question of whether the information being gathered and conveyed
by these NGOs is less trustworthy. Unless the NGO is transparent about its
aims, about the provenance of the material it is distributing, and about the
standards it uses in its own information-gathering, the consumer–whether a
journalist or a visitor to the website–will be justifiably wary.
The best media professionals spend their entire careers trying, as hard as they
can, to rid their own reporting of bias and to be fair to all sides. They believe,
and they are correct, that unbiased information is a genuine public good and
that biased information can mislead readers, including policymakers, into bad decisions–even social strife and violence. Many media training organizations
in conflict zones around the world are struggling to instill the notion of unbiased
reporting in media environments where the lack of it has proved disastrous.
At the same time few people believe that the American media, where
the culture of neutral and apolitical reporting has been most fiercely propagated,
are in fact unbiased.
Research-driven NGOs put a premium on rigorous, factual reporting. If they
play fast and loose with the facts, they lose credibility and so lose traction
with policymakers. Their reputations depend on objective reporting from the
field. At the same time, they work in service of a cause, advocating on behalf
of victims and seeking accountability for perpetrators. While different NGOs
have different standards for gathering, checking, and vetting information, the
entire purpose of that information is to act to protect human dignity. Those
who gather information must do so impartially, from all sides, but they are not
neutral towards atrocity.
Media organizations and advocacy groups stay independent of each other for
good reason. They are pursuing different objectives. Journalists’ refusal to distribute
content produced by others protects against the partisan abuse of the
media space. Meanwhile, international advocacy groups are wary of drifting
from their core mission into the media business. But changes in technology
and commerce, at least in some countries, are pushing them closer together.
To the extent that NGOs do produce more user-friendly content, they must
keep in mind a few principles for establishing their credibility: first, transparency
in the methods of collecting the information; second, a proven track
record and a reputation, over many years, for reliable research; and third,
complete openness about the aims of the organization and the fact of its
authorship.
NGOs still face the question of how far they want to go in creating user-friendly
content. Few seem inclined to reorient their identities as information producers
in the new information age. Filling the vacuum in international news takes
money, and most NGOs struggle to meet their existing budgets, let alone
expand into areas that seem tangential to their central mission. But if they
turn their backs on the trend, they will miss a critical opportunity to be heard.
This information revolution has big implications for more than just a handful
of advocacy groups. Any entity that produces denser material written for a
more specialist audience must now realize that the legions of those who will
transform it into something the layperson can understand–in other words, a
work of journalism–are now much diminished. To have maximum impact in
the world today, information must be repurposed and refashioned for multiple
audiences and platforms, like a seed sprouting in every direction. That is a
trend that no one who cares about influencing public opinion can afford to
ignore.
Carroll Bogert is the deputy executive director, external relations,
of Human Rights Watch.
1 Martin Moore, Shrinking World: The decline of international reporting in the British
press (London: Media Standards Trust, November 2010), p 17. The study looked at foreign
stories appearing in the first ten pages of four major daily newspapers.
2 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Directorate for Science,
Technology and Industry Committee for Information, Computer, and Communications
Policy, “The Evolution of News and the Internet,” June 11, 2010
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/30/24/45559596.pdf (accessed November 20, 2010),
p.7. The steepest declines were registered in the United States, the United Kingdom,
Greece, Italy, Canada, and Spain.
3 This essay focuses primarily on NGOs that do research and advocacy in multiple countries
and therefore interact regularly with journalists who cover one country for audiences
in another. Most of these remarks concern NGOs working on human rights and
other social justice issues, rather than, for example, global warming and the environment,
although they face some of the same challenges.
4 The four were actually convicted of torture that was revealed in another, unrelated
video. See “Indonesia: Investigate Torture Video From Papua,” Human Rights Watch
news release, October 20, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/10/20/indonesiainvestigate-
torture-video-papua.
5 Human Rights Watch, Torture Redux: The Rivival of Physical Coercion during
Interrogations in Bahrain, February 8, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/02/08/torture-redux
6 Pamela Constable, “Demise of the Foreign Correspondent,” The Washington Post,
February 18, 2007.
7 John Maxwell Hamilton, Journalism’s roving eye: a history of American foreign reporting
(Lousiana State University Press, 2010), p. 457.
8 “Public Knowledge of Current Affairs Little Changed by News and Information
Revolutions: What Americans Know: 1989-2007,” The Pew Research Center for the People
& the Press, April 15, 2007 http://people-press.org/report/319/public-knowledge-of-current-
affairs-little-changed-by-news-and-information-revolutions (accessed November 29,
2010).
9 Richard Wray, “Media Consumption on the Increase,” The Guardian, April 19, 2010
http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/apr/19/media-consumption-survey
(accessed November 21, 2010).
10 See, for example, the Temasek Review in Singapore; Malaysiakini and other online
portals in Malaysia; numerous Vietnamese bloggers; and the Democratic Voice of Burma
and Mizzima, among others.
11 OECD, 2010
12 “Mass Media and the UN: What the Advocacy Community Can Do to Shape Decision
Making,” Columbia University School of International Public Affairs, May 2009, on file at
Human Rights Watch. The respondents came from the UN Secretariat, various UN departments
whose work touches on human rights, and diplomats representing 12 of the 15 UN
Security Council members.
13 Many photographers now raise money from foundations to partner with NGOs. Among
the most active donors, for example, is the Open Society Institute’s Documentary
Photography Project: http://www.soros.org/initiatives/photography (accessed
November 20, 2010); photographers at Magnum are increasingly willing to “partner…
with select charitable organizations and provid[e] free or reduced rate access to the
Magnum Photos archive,” http://magnumfoundation.org/core-programs.html (accessed
November 20, 2010).
14 Private conversation with CBS producer, October 2010.
15 Glenda Cooper, “When lines between NGO and news organization blur,” Nieman
Journalism Lab, December 21, 2009, http://www.niemanlab.org/2009/12/glenda-cooper-
when-lines-between-ngo-and-news-organization-blur/ (accessed November 20, 2010).