Yemen
Yemen’s human rights situation continued to deteriorate in 2010. Amid political
unrest in the south, hundreds of arbitrary arrests and the use of lethal force
against peaceful demonstrators undermined advances in the rule of law.
Skirmishes tested a truce in the conflict with Huthi rebels in the north, and government
ministries, the army, rebels, and “tribes” in various conflict affected
northern areas obstructed humanitarian assistance. Accountability for laws of war
violations remained lacking. Yemen intensified counterterrorism efforts against
suspected al Qaeda members in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), but some attacks
killed and injured civilians.
Friends of Yemen, a group of states and intergovernmental organizations established
in January, failed to press for an end to human rights abuses as a condition
for pledging financial and technical assistance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
The United States increased military assistance and cooperation with Yemen’s
government following the failed AQAP attempt in December 2009 to blow up an
airliner en route to Detroit. AQAP conducted numerous deadly attacks in 2010,
particularly on state intelligence and security officials on its list of 55 Yemenis targeted
for assassination.
In June four AQAP gunmen attacked a post of the Political Security Organization
(one of Yemen’s several intelligence agencies) in Aden, killing at least 11 intelligence
officers and soldiers, and freeing several suspected militants.
In a September bus ambush in San’a AQAP killed 14 senior officers who had
recently completed a US counterterrorism intelligence course. In October militants
in San’a fired a rocket-propelled grenade at a car carrying five British Embassy
staff members, including the deputy ambassador, injuring three. In April a suicide
bomber tried unsuccessfully to kill then British Ambassador Tim Torlot.
The US government revealed it had targeted Yemeni-American preacher Anwar al-
Awlaqi for assassination based on his alleged links to AQAP plots. In November a Yemeni court indicted Al-Awlaqi, who is hiding in Yemen, on terrorism-related
charges and ordered his capture, dead or alive.
The US reportedly assisted Yemen in at least four airstrikes on alleged AQAP targets.
One—a cruise missile attack on suspected AQAP members on December 17,
2009—resulted in at least 41 civilian deaths in the southern province of Abyan.
The strike reportedly involved at least one cluster munition, a weapon that due to
its indiscriminate nature poses unacceptable risk to civilians. Another US-assisted
attack in central Marib province in May killed a deputy governor rather than
the AQAP suspect, prompting the victim’s tribesmen to attack strategic oil
pipelines.
Yemen’s government arrested scores of terrorism suspects on weak evidence and
unlawfully detained many for weeks or months without charge, according to reputable
Yemeni human rights activists. Concerns persisted that President Ali
Abdullah Saleh used the counterterrorism campaign as an excuse to target members
of Yemen’s separatist Southern Movement and independent media.
For three weeks in August Yemeni security forces shelled suspected AQAP targets
in Lawdar, a town in Abyan province that is home to separatists. Media reports
said the three dozen victims included al Qaeda members and security forces, but
that the attacks also damaged hundreds of homes and displaced tens of thousands
of people. In September the government’s three-day attack on suspected al
Qaeda hideouts in Hawta, southern Shabwa province, displaced thousands more
families.
Campaign against Southern Separatists
Security forces suppressed protests of the Southern Movement, establishing
checkpoints on days of announced demonstrations and arresting suspected participants.
On September 23, security forces arrested at least 12 Yemenis in Aden
who were planning to demonstrate to draw attention to their grievances when the
Friends of Yemen group of states met in New York to discuss aid to Yemen.
Deputy Interior Minister Salih al-Zawari said there were 245 southern protests in
March, involving 200 acts of violence. A southern human rights report listed 13
dead, 31 wounded, and 61 arrested in separatists’ clashes with government forces in May alone. In July police in Aden killed one man when they fired on a
public funeral march for Ahmad Darwish, who allegedly died from torture in late
June following his arrest after AQAP’s attack on the Aden intelligence facility.
Photographs appeared to show bruises covering Darwish’s body. From May to July
the army blockaded southern areas of al-Dhali’, Lahj, and parts of Shabwa. Some
Southern Movement activists erected road blocks and called for civil unrest, closing
government offices, schools, and shops. In June the army repeatedly shelled
al-Dhali’ city center, leading to several civilian casualties.
Conflict in the North
On February 12, Huthi rebels and government forces in the northern Sa’da governorate
agreed to a truce, ending six months of heavy fighting, which was the sixth
round of violence since June 2004. In August both sides agreed to a 22-point plan
to implement the truce, including releasing all prisoners. In June Yemeni NGOs
presented a list of 249 persons they said the government had tried, or was trying,
in connection with the Sa’da conflict, despite expectations under the truce that
they would not face punishment. A further 86 remained detained without known
charges. Despite the truce, skirmishes between Huthis and the army or armybacked
tribal militias led to scores of civilian and fighter casualties.
As of mid-August the conflict had displaced just under 330,000 people, almost
half of whom fled between August 2009 and February 2010. Only a few displaced
persons went to official camps; more than 80 percent live with host families or in
open spaces, schools, and mosques. Aid agencies reported struggling to reach
them due to insecurity and access restrictions imposed by officials, local tribes,
and rebels. By August over 16,000 displaced persons were known to have
returned home.
Between November 2009 and January 2010 Saudi forces became a party to the
armed conflict and prevented persons seeking refuge from crossing its border,
forcing thousands back to Yemen, according to media reports.
Government forces and Huthi fighters recruited children for combat. Huthi fighters
reportedly carried out summary executions and endangered civilians by firing
from populated areas. Government forces reportedly conducted indiscriminate aerial bombardment in civilian-populated areas, including a crowded market in
al-Talh on September 14, and a gathering of displaced persons in al-’Adi on
September 16. Neither party took steps to investigate or address possible laws-ofwar
violations.
Freedom of Expression
On May 22—the 20th anniversary of the unification of North and South Yemen—
President Saleh declared an amnesty that freed many, but not all, detainees and
prisoners arrested for peaceful expression. Political Security continued to detain
peaceful Southern Movement dissidents. On August 16, intelligence forces arrested
Abd al-Ilah Haidar al-Shayi’, a terrorism expert and journalist for the official
Saba News Agency, accusing him of being an al Qaeda spokesperson based on
his interviews with the group’s members.
More than 16 journalists and peaceful activists received sentences ranging from
fines to 10 years in prison in 2009 and 2010, mostly for airing grievances felt by
many in the south of the country. The Specialized Criminal Court in March sentenced
a professor of economic geography, Husain al-’Aqil, to three years in
prison for publicly raising concerns about control of Yemen’s oil wealth. After al-
’Aqil’s release in the May amnesty, Aden University in September “froze” his academic
duties.
On May 24 the Press and Publication Court, established in 2009 to try journalists,
sentenced Sami Ghalib, chief editor of the weekly Al-Nida’, and four colleagues to
a suspended three-month prison term for “undermining the unity” of Yemen. The
information minister banned newspapers, including Al-Watani, because of sympathetic
coverage of southern protests. Some have managed to republish, others
have been hauled to court or shut down.
In April Minister of Justice Ghazi al-Aghbari proposed amending the penal code by
adding vague language that would criminalize “undermining established national
principles.” The proposals remained under parliamentary review at time of writing.
Women and Girls’ Rights
Child marriages and forced marriages remain widespread, exposing young girls to
domestic violence and maternal mortality, and truncating their education. Judges
are not obliged to ensure girls’ free consent before notarizing marriage contracts.
In March a 12 or 13-year-old girl died from severe genital bleeding three days after
her marriage. Amid opposition from Islamic conservatives, President Saleh has
not yet signed into law a measure parliament passed in February 2009 setting the
minimum age for marriage at 17.
Domestic violence and marital rape are not criminalized. A women’s shelter
opened in 2009 in San’a housing women fleeing from violence and former prisoners
who have completed their sentences but are rejected by their families.
Despite some improvements, Yemen still has a high maternal mortality rate of
370 deaths per 100,000 live births. Approximately seven to eight women die each
day from childbirth complications. More than 70 percent of women deliver at
home.
Key International Actors
In August Qatar mediated between the government and Huthi rebels. The United
Kingdom in January assembled the Friends of Yemen group, including key Gulf
countries, the G8, and intergovernmental organizations. In March and September
meetings, the group discussed financial assistance to Yemen, but failed to tie aid
to ending the human rights abuses fueling Yemen’s crises.
Donors contributed only 49 percent of the requested US$187 million under the
United Nations 2010 Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan. Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
and other Persian Gulf states provide substantial amounts of assistance to
Yemen, including to tribal leaders, religious institutions, and the government.
European Union states also gave humanitarian and development aid.
The US more than doubled its military assistance to Yemen to $150 million, as
well as giving US$110 million in humanitarian and economic aid. The US publicly
supported Yemen’s unity, but urged peaceful resolution of its crises.