Yemen
The fragile transition government that succeeded President Ali Abdullah Saleh
in 2012 following mass protests failed to address multiple human rights challenges.
Conflict-related abuses, legally sanctioned discrimination against
women, judicial executions of child offenders, and non-accountability for the
previous government’s human rights violations all persisted in 2013.
Five hundred and sixty five representatives of political parties, women, youth,
and civil society launched a national dialogue process in March, which was
slated to produce recommendations within six months to guide the subsequent
constitutional drafting process regarding the nature of the state. At time of writing,
the dialogue had yet to end because of delays caused by political maneuvering.
Clashes continued between state security forces and armed factions demanding
greater autonomy in southern Yemen and between Salafist groups and
armed tribesmen and Huthis in the north. The Yemeni government and the
United States continued to engage in military operations with the Islamist
armed group Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). On December 5, suicide
bombing attacks both claimed and denied by AQAP against Yemen’s
Defense Ministry compound killed at least 52 people and injured another 161.
The dead included at least seven foreign doctors and nurses working at the military
hospital in the compound.
Yemen faces a growing humanitarian crisis, with nearly half the population
lacking sufficient food, according to UN agencies.
Accountability
In 2012, Yemen’s parliament granted Saleh and his aides immunity from prosecution,
and the current president, Abdu Rabu Mansour Hadi, has not created
mechanisms to provide accountability for past abuses.
In September 2012, President Hadi decreed that an independent commission of
inquiry should be created to investigate alleged violations committed during
the 2011 uprising and recommend accountability for perpetrators and redress
for victims. Over one year later, he had still not nominated the commissioners.
Hadi presented a deeply flawed draft transitional justice law to parliament in
January, but it has yet to be passed. The draft law does not grant victims judicial redress, but is merely a victim compensation scheme, limited in time to
events of 2011.
The trial began in September 2012 of 78 defendants—but not the key suspects—
for the deadliest attack of the uprising, in which pro-government gunmen
killed 45 protesters and wounded 200 on March 18, 2011. It was marred by
political interference, failure to follow leads that might have implicated government
officials, and factual errors. In April 2013, a trial judge ordered prosecutors
to reinvestigate former president Saleh and 11 top aides in connection with
the incident.
Militant Attacks
AQAP carried out dozens of deadly bombings and other attacks on Yemeni
security forces. The Islamist group held several foreigners for ransom, releasing
most after weeks or months, but continued to detain Saudi diplomat Abdallah
al-Khalidi, who was abducted in March 2012.
The US carried out at least 22 drone strikes on alleged AQAP members as of
mid-September, according to the New America Foundation and the United
Kingdom-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism. The strikes killed between
72 and 139 people, most of them alleged militants, but lack of access to most
targeted areas and the unwillingness of the United States to provide information
on attacks, prevented full inquiries, including regarding civilian casualties.
A Human Rights Watch investigation of six US targeted killing operations in
Yemen—one in 2009 and the rest in 2012-13—found two attacks were unlawfully
indiscriminate and four others raised serious laws-of-war concerns.
Unlawful Use of Mines
In May 2013, Human Rights Watch documented the use of antipersonnel landmines
allegedly by the Republican Guards in Bani Jarmooz, an area northeast of
the capital, Sanaa, in 2011. The mines have caused at least 1 death and 14
injuries of civilians, including 9 children.
Yemen is a state party to the Mine Ban Treaty, and at a meeting of the treaty in
Geneva in May, renewed its commitment to the treaty, promised to investigate
the allegations, and committed itself to addressing the issue by clearing the
mines and assisting the victims.
The Ministry of Defense established a committee to investigate the allegations
of landmine use and demine the area, but as of September the committee had
yet to send an assessment team to the area.
Attacks on Health Workers
Health workers and facilities are struggling to protect themselves from armed
groups. Medecins Sans Frontieres reported 18 different attacks against their
staff in Amran in the past year, including shootings, threats, and physical
attacks on health workers.
Children and Armed Conflict
In recent years, Human Rights Watch has documented cases of children participating
in combat with both the First Armored Division and the Republican
Guard. In June 2012, UNICEF Yemen reported several incidents of child recruitment
by the Yemeni armed forces and by the armed group Ansar al-Sharia, an
offshoot of AQAP. In September, the United Nations special rapporteur on children
in armed conflict announced that the government had approved an action
plan to end the recruitment and use of children in government armed forces.
In Aden, from February until June, the Southern Movement (or Hirak), an
umbrella group seeking independence or greater autonomy for southern
Yemen, prevented nearly 50,000 children from going to school on Wednesdays
and Saturdays so that they could participate in a civil disobedience campaign.
At least a dozen schools in Aden came under armed attack during the campaign
from Hirak forces, some several times. In September, the civil disobedience
campaign resumed, but campaigners agreed to exempt schools, allowing students
to attend even on the weekly day of general strike.
Juvenile Death Penalty
Despite a 1994 law prohibiting death sentences for child offenders (anyone
under 18 at the time of their crime), in the last five years Yemen has carried out
multiple executions of individuals who may have been children at the time of
their offense. At least 22 possible child offenders among convicted murderers remain on death row in Sanaa’s Central Prison, and in prisons in Ibb, Taiz,
Hodeida, and Aden.
Yemen’s low rate of birth registration means that accused individuals often do
not have birth certificates to establish their age. In addition, not all judges follow
the law prohibiting death sentences for juvenile offenders.
In June 2013, Yemen’s Justice Ministry established a committee of forensic
medical experts to assess the age of young individuals accused of serious
crimes whose age remains in doubt. The committee represented an effort to
tackle the problem of death sentences for child offenders, but it relies solely on
forensic medicine, which has a high margin of error, according to studies carried
out by the Dutch government and the UK Royal College of Pediatrics and
Child Health. Social evaluations, including a review of documents such as
school registration as well as interviews with community members, remain necessary
to supplement forensic evidence.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women in Yemen face severe discrimination in law and in practice. Women cannot
marry without the permission of their male guardians; they do not have
equal rights to divorce, inheritance or child custody; and a lack of legal protection
leaves them exposed to domestic and sexual violence.
Child marriage remains widespread with doctors and the media reporting the
deaths of child brides as young as 8 years old following their wedding night or
childbirth. Yemen has not legislated a minimum age of marriage.
The national dialogue presented an important opportunity to secure protection
for women and girls’ rights. The rights and freedoms committee within the
national dialogue made positive recommendations on equality of men and
women and non-discrimination, including a recommendation that the minimum
age of marriage should be set at 18.
Attacks on Journalists
Since President Hadi took office, the authorities have eased formal controls on
media, though legal restrictions remain. However there has been an increase in
assaults on journalists and bloggers by the authorities and their supporters, and
by militant groups, including Saleh loyalists, Huthis, and religious conservatives.
In the first half of 2013, the Freedom Foundation, a Yemeni organization that
monitors press freedom, recorded 144 attacks affecting 205 media members,
including verbal harassment, confiscations, politicized prosecutions, enforced
disappearances, and killings.
The government generally has not condemned these attacks, investigated
them, held those responsible to account, or taken measures to protect journalists.
Key International Actors
In September 2013, the Friends of Yemen, a group of 39 countries and 8 international
organizations, reiterated their joint pledge of US$7.8 billion that was
made in 2012. Only 24 percent of the aid pledges had been dispersed by
September 2013, according to the Yemeni government.
The US, the largest non-Arab donor, pledged $256 million in bilateral aid from
January to September 2013. It reports having provided more than $221 million
in humanitarian assistance since 2012, $100 million in development and economic
aid, and approximately $247 million in counterterrorism and security
assistance.
Since May 2012, US President Barack Obama has in place an executive order
allowing the Treasury Department to freeze the US-based assets of anyone who
“obstructs” implementation of the political transition, scheduled to end with
the Yemeni presidential elections in 2014.
In September 2013, for the fifth consecutive year, Obama issued a full waiver
allowing Yemen to receive military assistance, despite documented use of child
soldiers by various forces, including government troops and pro-government
militias.
In September 2013, the UN Human Rights Council passed resolution 24/32,
which made reference to different human rights challenges, including child
offenders facing the death penalty, child marriage, the protection of journalists,
the need for investigations into past abuses, and the passage of a transitional
justice law.