Yemen
The fragile transition government that succeeded President Ali Abdullah Saleh
in 2012 following mass protests faces multiple challenges in ending human
rights violations such as arbitrary detention, attacks on free speech and assembly,
and child-soldier deployment. Fighting linked to the political upheaval
decreased, but sectarian clashes continued in the north, and government forces
fought with the Yemen branch of al Qaeda in the south. The country faces a
growing humanitarian crisis, with nearly half the population lacking sufficient
food.
Saleh left office in February 2012, under an exit accord brokered by the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and backed in most aspects by the United Nations
Security Council (Security Council), the United States, and European Union
member states. As part of the accord, Yemen’s parliament on January 21 granted
immunity to Saleh, and those who served with him for political crimes committed
during his 33-year rule. The immunity law violates Yemen’s international
legal obligations to prosecute serious human rights violations, including attacks
by government forces and pro-government gangs that killed at least 270 protesters
and bystanders during the uprising.
The accord designated Saleh’s deputy, Abdu Rabu Mansour Hadi, as a two-year
transition president.
Under a UN-facilitated “Implementing Mechanism” that serves as a transition
blueprint, the government is to bring security forces—including those run by
Saleh’s relatives—under civilian command, pass a transitional justice law, draft
a new constitution, reform the electoral and judicial systems, and hold general
elections in 2014. It is also to convene a national dialogue conference to
address grievances by groups including northern Huthi rebels and the Southern
Movement, a coalition of groups seeking greater autonomy or secession for the
former South Yemen.
Transition measures were resisted by loyalists of Saleh, who remains in Yemen
as head of the General People’s Congress. Pro-Saleh troops and tribesmen in July and August stormed the Interior and Defense ministries, prompting gunfights
that killed 21 people.
Accountability
President Hadi on September 22 authorized the creation of an independent
commission to investigate violations during the uprising, and recommend
accountability for perpetrators and redress for victims. A transitional justice
draft law remained stalled.
The trial began in September for 78 defendants in the deadliest attack on protesters
of the uprising, in which pro-government gunmen killed 45 and wounded
200 on March 18, 2011. Political interference and failure to investigate evidence
that implicated government officials marred the prosecution’s case. Most key
defendants remain fugitives.
Arbitrary Detention
All sides in the uprising have released scores of protesters, fighters, and others
whom they had arbitrarily detained. However, dozens more detainees remained
in the custody of government and opposition forces, and some upon release
alleged torture.
Armed Conflict
Fighting ended in Sanaa, the capital, and Taizz but conflicts elsewhere among
various armed groups killed dozens of civilians. Many were casualties of landmines
and improvised explosive devices.
All sides in fighting in southern Abyan governorate—Yemeni soldiers and popular
committees backed by US aerial drones, and the Yemen branch of al Qaeda
and its local affiliate, Ansar al-Sharia—have been implicated in laws of war violations.
In the north, Huthi rebels clashed with Salafi fighters seeking to stem their
takeover of Sa’da governorate and nearby governorates. Fighting between government
and tribal forces in Arhab, outside Sanaa, ebbed in mid-2012.
Children and Armed Conflict
In Sanaa, government and opposition forces continued to deploy children to
patrol streets, guard checkpoints, and sometimes fight, in violation of international
prohibitions against the use of children in armed conflict. Human Rights
Watch received credible reports of Islamist militants and pro-government popular
committees deploying child soldiers in Abyan.
State security forces and opposition armed groups deployed in schools around
the country, placing children at risk and undermining education. Between
January and June, more than 170 schools were attacked or subjected to other
military use nationwide, according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR).
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Peaceful Assembly
Freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly improved significantly
in 2012. However, scores of journalists were attacked or harassed by individuals
or armed groups from across the political spectrum.
Al-Ayyam, an influential Aden-based newspaper, has been closed since an
assault by government forces in 2010. Criminal cases that the former government
brought against it remained pending.
The authorities continued to prosecute journalists on politically motivated
charges in a specialized media court that failed to meet international standards
of due process.
Abdulelah Haidar Shae of Saba news agency remained in prison on terrorism
charges, despite having received a pardon from then-President Saleh in
February 2011. Yemeni and international media reported that US President
Barack Obama requested Shae’s continued detention. The specialized media
court in January 2011 sentenced Shae to a five-year term after a trial marked by
procedural irregularities. Shae had alleged that the Yemeni and US governments
had committed abuses in their fight against al Qaeda.
Authorities allowed several new political parties and more than 100 nongovernmental
organizations to register, and lifted bans on visits by international
human rights groups.
Humanitarian Crisis
More than 10 million people—nearly one-half the population—lack sufficient
food, 12 million lack access to clean water, and 1 million children are malnourished,
according to the World Food Program (WFP) and other UN humanitarian
agencies.
The number of internally displaced nearly doubled to half a million people,
largely due to fighting in Abyan. As of November, tens of thousands of people
had returned to Abyan despite damaged homes, shattered infrastructure, and
the presence of landmines and other unexploded ordnance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Yemen-based Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) conducted dozens of
deadly bombings and other attacks on Yemeni security targets.
AQAP and Ansar al-Sharia in April released 73 government soldiers after holding
them hostage for more than a month and threatening to kill them if the authorities
did not exchange them for detained terrorism suspects. AQAP held foreigners
for ransom, including a Saudi diplomat and a Swiss teacher.
Ansar al-Sharia reportedly committed numerous abuses against people in areas
it controlled in Abyan, including amputating limbs of alleged thieves and publicly
executing three alleged spies in February.
The US increased covert drone strikes and piloted air attacks on alleged AQAP
militants, conducting 25 to 83 such attacks in 2012, according to the Bureau of
Investigative Journalism (TBIJ), a UK-based public interest reporting service. The
strikes killed at least 173 militants and civilians, TBIJ reported, but lack of access
to the targeted areas prevented independent verification of the data, including
the number of civilian casualties.
Crackdown on Southern Movement
In Aden, Mukallah and other southern flashpoints, state security forces used
disproportionate force against largely peaceful factions of the Southern
Movement, and armed factions of the Southern Movement increased attacks on
security forces.
Security forces threatened health care in Aden by forcibly removing wounded
alleged Southern Movement militants from hospitals, exchanging fire with gunmen
seeking to block the arrests, and beating medical staff. Gunmen protecting
the alleged militants fueled the violence by firing at the security forces on hospital
grounds.
In December 2011, security forces released two Southern Movement leaders,
Hassan Baoum and his son Fawaz, after arbitrarily detaining them for 10
months.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women in Yemen generally are excluded from public life but played an important
role in anti-Saleh protests.
The transition blueprint envisaged “adequate” representation of women in all
political bodies both during and after the transition. Many Yemeni women’s
rights activists are seeking a quota of 30 percent.
Child marriages remain widespread, exposing girls to domestic violence and
truncating their education.
Yemen has a high maternal mortality rate of 370 deaths per 100,000 live births.
Seven or eight women die each day from childbirth complications.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other Gulf states provide substantial assistance to the
Yemen government, tribal leaders, and religious institutions. The US is the
largest donor outside the region. EU states also provide significant aid. The multilateral Friends of Yemen donors in September pledged US$7.9 billion to aid the
transition.
The US pledged $346 million in bilateral aid for 2012, of which $185 million is
for humanitarian and development assistance, its largest non-security package
to date. In May, President Obama issued an executive order allowing the
Treasury Department to freeze the US-based assets of anyone who “obstructs”
implementation of the political transition.
In October, for the third consecutive year, Obama issued a waiver allowing
Yemen to receive military assistance, despite documented use of child soldiers
by forces, including government troops and pro-government militias.
In June, the UN Security Council passed resolution 2051, threatening sanctions
against those undermining the transition. In September, Yemen allowed the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to open an office in
Sanaa. In March and September, the UN Human Rights Council called for the
release of all those arbitrarily detained, an end to child soldier recruitment, and
transparent and independent investigations into violations during the 2011
uprising.