South Africa
As South Africa enters its eleventh year of democracy, its challenge lies in
implementing policies in line with the country’s far-reaching and progressive
constitution. Areas of particular concern relate to the rights of detained and
accused persons, excessive use of force by police, the rights of refugees and
asylum seekers, and access to education on commercial farms.
Police
The decrease in 2005 in the number of deaths in police custody and as a
result of police action is welcome. Reforms in policing particularly in the
conduct of arrests and detention had a positive effect. By April 2005, 652
deaths involving law enforcement had been reported—down from 714 by
March 2004. Of these 652 cases, 286 occurred in police custody and included
deaths by suicide, natural causes, and injuries sustained prior to detention.
The remaining 366 deaths were the result of law enforcement action, including
fatalities incurred in the course of arrests, beatings in detention, and
shooting of innocent bystanders.
Of concern is a gradual increase in the number of cases of inappropriate use
of force by the police—a matter that has been raised and investigated by the
Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), an independent oversight body.
Increasingly, police have been involved in violent confrontations with communities
protesting against a lack of services. In May, police used rubber bullets
to control residents of an informal settlement of Happy Valley,
Kommetjie who were protesting against tardy delivery of housing and basic
services. On September 21, in a protest against the local municipalities’ slow
response to a typhoid outbreak in Botleng, Delmas, the police used rubber
bullets against protestors, injuring at least six people. On July 12, police used
teargas and rubber bullets to disperse a peaceful demonstration to protest
against the lack of progress in the dispensing of antiretroviral medication for
the treatment of HIV/AIDS in Queenstown, Eastern Cape.
In June, the ICD completed its investigation into the death of a seventeenyear-
old boy following the firing of rubber bullets on peaceful protestors of eNtabazwe—a township previously designated for Africans—outside
Harrismith on August 30, 2004. It recommended that the state should prosecute
the police officers who fired at the protesters. These officers are due to
stand trial on February 6, 2006. The ICD urged that police officers should
not use lethal ammunition such as birdshot and buckshot to manage protestors.
The United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms
by Law Enforcement Officials provides that police shall, as far as possible,
use nonviolent means before resorting to the use of force and firearms.
Whenever the lawful use of force and firearms is unavoidable, police must
exercise restraint in such use and act in proportion to the seriousness of the
offense and the legitimate objective to be achieved, and also minimize damage
and injury.
Prisons
The entry into force of sections addressing the treatment of prisoners in the
Correctional Services Act 111 of 1998 on July 31, 2004 provides a framework
to safeguard the human rights of prisoners. Overcrowding in South Africa’s
prisons remains high. As of September 30, 2005, 155,770 prisoners were
being held in facilities that should accommodate 113,825. The number of
sentenced prisoners decreased from 133, 764 in March 31, 2004 to 110, 971
in September. The number of pre-trial prisoners dropped from 52, 326 as of
January 31, to 44, 799 in September 31, 2005. This marginal drop from the
previous year is due, in part, to the early release of 31, 865 qualifying prisoners
between May and August. Despite these steps, overcrowding continues to
threaten the health and living conditions of prisoners and impedes rehabilitation
efforts. Sexual assaults and gang violence are a further threat to the safety
of prisoners. The Inspecting Judge of Prisons—an independent oversight
body—has raised concerns at the high prison population, and has recommended
the early release of prisoners who are too poor to afford bail in order
to reduce the number of inmates. As of March 31, 2005, 13,880 detained
prisoners—about a third of the pre-trial population—could not afford bail.
Following, in part, a constitutional court order requiring the substitution of
the death sentence in May 2005, sixty-three inmates were no longer imprisoned under the death sentence. As of September 30, forty three prisoners
were awaiting the substitution of their sentences.
Children in Detention
Juveniles continue to be incarcerated while awaiting trial despite international
legal requirements that child offenders not be detained except as a last
resort. Notably, however, the number of children awaiting trial in detention
has dropped significantly from between two to three thousand in March 2004
to 1227 as of September 30, 2005. The total number of children in detention
is 2314. International standards stipulate that juveniles should be held in separate
quarters from adults; however, this is not always the case in South
Africa. Children in detention are reportedly victims of sexual abuse, violence,
and gang related activities. The Child Justice Bill, deliberated in the South
African Parliament 2005, proposes a restorative justice approach in an
attempt to move children out of the criminal justice system. The bill establishes
one-stop child justice centers.
Rights of Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Since the inception of the 1998 Refugees Act, which formally protects the
rights of asylum seekers and refugees in line with international law, South
Africa has witnessed a steady increase in the number of asylum seekers. In
2003 the asylum seeker and refugee population was 110, 643. By the end of
2004, this number had increased to 142,907. 32, 600 new asylum applications
were lodged with the Department of Home Affairs in 2004. The implementation
of the Refugees Act remains problematic. Delays in the refugee status
determination process, inconsistency in application of a court decision allowing
for the right to work and study for asylum seekers;, corrupt practices and
inadequate procedures for unaccompanied minors seeking asylum render
protections for asylum seekers inadequate. The number of applications for
asylum pending at the end of 2004 was 115,220, while only 27,683 applications
had been granted refugee status. These administrative difficulties can
present a risk of unlawful arrest and possible deportation for asylum seekers.
South Africa deported a total of 167,137 foreign nationals in 2004. Between January and September 30, South Africa deported 156, 893. The majority of
the deportees are from Southern Africa.
Violence against Women and Children
Violence against women and children is widely recognized as a serious concern
in South Africa: 55,114 rapes and attempted rapes were reported to the
South African police between April 2004 and March 2005 (though the real
number is almost certainly significantly higher.) This is an increase from the
previous year over a similar period. The South African Parliament considered
the Sexual Offenses Bill to remove anomalies from the existing law by broadening
the definition of rape and focusing on the victim rather than the perpetrator
with respect to violence against women in 2005. Police and the court
officials continue to receive training in handling cases of violence against
women and children. The government established fifty-two sexual offenses
courts to adjudicate and focus specifically on cases related to gender violence
by end 2004.
Social and Economic Rights
South Africa has a number of good policies intended to safeguard social and
economic rights. However, the government continues to face challenges in a
number of areas including land reform, provision of services such as health
care and education in rural areas, and broadly finding a solution to poverty
(between 40 and 50 percent of the population can be considered poor). 2005
saw several demonstrations against poor delivery of services in impoverished
communities in the Western Cape, Free State, Eastern Cape and Gauteng
provinces.
People living in rural areas continue to face difficulties in accessing
their rights to health care and social services. For example, although
access to public schooling for children is widely available and enrollment
continues to increase, conditions of schools in poor areas remain
inadequate. Insecure buildings, lack of water, and unhygienic sanitation
facilities are some of the conditions pupils face. Physical access to education in rural areas remains difficult for a number of rural learners.
Walking distances can reach thirty kilometers each day to and from
school, exposing learners to dangers such as sexual violence and contributing
to high dropout rates. With respect to public schools on
farms, there has been marginal progress in concluding contractual
agreements between government and farm owners. These contracts
delineate the roles and responsibilities of each party in providing education.
Since 1997, when legislation was enacted providing for these contracts,
only approximately half these schools have such contractual
agreements. The lack of contracts hinders children’s abilities to receive
a quality education. A government ministerial committee on rural education
released a report in May that makes a number of key recommendations
to improve schooling in rural areas. The national Department
of Education indicated that it was preparing a policy document on the
recommendations. The South African Human Rights Commission—an
independent statutory body—conducted public hearings on the right to
a basic education in October 2005.
Key International Actors
In the promotion of human rights, democracy and peace, South Africa continues
to play a key role in Africa under the auspices of the African Union.
South Africa has provided troops in peace support operations, supported
post-conflict reconstruction and led mediation efforts in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Burundi, Darfur, western Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire
respectively.
The South African government began a national consultative process of the
African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)—a self-monitoring, voluntary
mechanism—as agreed to by the African Union and Government
Implementation Committee of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development to review the country’s practice of democracy, governance and
social and economic development in September. The APRM country review
team will consider this report when it visits South Africa in 2006.