South Africa
South Africa’s third general elections marked that country’s tenth year
of its constitutional democracy. The institutional and policy framework
have laid the foundation for the promotion and protection of human
rights. However, human rights concerns remain; particularly in relation
to the rights of detained and accused persons; excessive use of force by
police; the rights of foreign nationals; and violence against women. Ten
years since the first democratic elections, the realization of social and
economic rights—such as access to primary education in rural areas—
has become a pressing human rights issue. Although many human rights
problems can be partly attributed to the legacy of apartheid, the current
government could do more to implement policies that address and prevent
abuses.
Police
Although the government has introduced significant reforms, inappropriate
and excessive use of force by police remains a serious human
rights issue. From April 2003 to March 2004, the Independent
Complaints Directorate (ICD), a statutory oversight body, received
reports of 383 deaths in police custody, with twenty percent of these
deaths resulting from deaths in police cells. Other deaths are in course
of effecting arrest. While it is encouraging that the reporting mechanism
is in place, the increasing number of deaths, particularly in police
custody, is worrying. The police have prevented the ICD from initiating
inspections at police holding cells absent a complaint. Police have also
on occasion used excessive force against peaceful demonstrators.
Increasingly, police have been involved in violent confrontations with
communities protesting against a lack of services. Police officers killed a
seventeen-year-old boy and injured more than twenty children after firing
rubber bullets on protestors of eNtabazwe—a township previously
designated for Africans—outside Harrismith on a national road on
August 30, 2004. On October 5, in a protest against the installation of pre-paid water meters in Chiawelo, Soweto, police used stun grenades
and batons to disperse demonstrators.
Prisons
Overcrowding in South Africa’s prisons continues to be a problem. As
of March 31, 2004, 187, 640 prisoners were being held in facilities that
should accommodate 110,787. The numbers of sentenced has increased
from 92, 581 in January 1995 to 133, 764 as of March 31, 2004.
Overcrowding continues to threaten the health and living conditions of
prisoners and impedes rehabilitation efforts. Sexual assaults and gang
violence are a further threat to the safety of prisoners. To ease overcrowding,
the Inspecting Judge of Prisons—an independent oversight
body—has recommended the early release of prisoners who are too
poor to afford bail. As of March 31, 2004, thirteen thousand detained
persons—about a third of the pre-trial population—could not afford
bail.
Despite almost a decade since the death penalty was declared unconstitutional
and abolished in South Africa, 106 prisoners remain incarcerated
under the death sentence. The government is yet to commute their
sentences to life imprisonment.
Children in Detention
Despite international law requirements that child offenders not be
detained except as a last resort, the number of juveniles in detention
facilities- mostly jails - awaiting trial continues to increase. There are
currently more than two thousand child offenders in detention awaiting
trial—up from around five hundred in 1995. While in some cases juveniles
are held separately from adults, this is not always the case, leaving
them particularly vulnerable to sexual abuse, violence, and gang related
activities. The Child Justice Bill, deliberated in the South African Parliament during 2004, proposes a restorative justice approach in an
attempt to move children out of the criminal justice system.
Rights of Foreign Nationals
South Africa has seen a large increase in the number of undocumented
migrants from Southern Africa and asylum seekers from the rest of
Africa since 1994. As of 2003, the department of home affairs has
received 152, 414 asylum applications since 1994. Although the 1998
Refugee Act provides a legal system to protect the rights of asylum
seekers and refugees that incorporates international standards, significant
problems remain in its administration. Concerns have been raised
about intolerance of foreign nationals, particularly in effecting arrests
for deportation. The ICD is investigating police officers for unlawful
arrest of a South African woman who was “too dark,” and subsequently
prepared for deportation on September 29. Close to fifty thousand
undocumented migrants from Mozambique and Zimbabwe work on
commercial farms. Yet, South Africa deports around four thousand people
per month mostly to Mozambique and Zimbabwe, who return illegally
to South Africa.
Violence against Women and Children
Violence against women and children is widely recognized as a serious
concern in South Africa: 52, 733 rapes and attempted rapes were
reported to the South African police between April 2003 and March
2004 a slight increase from the previous. The South African government
has taken important legislative steps to try to combat violence
against women, including introducing a new Sexual Offences Bill to
remove anomalies from the existing law, which was discussed in
Parliament during 2004. Police continue to receive training in handling
rape cases. Specialized courts are being established, yet conviction rates
remain low. In a country where one quarter of adults are HIV-positive,
rape can mean a death sentence. In April 2002, the government pledged to provide rape survivors with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP)—antiretroviral
drugs that can reduce the chances of contracting the virus
from an HIV-positive attacker. Government inaction and misinformation
by high-level officials as well as administrative delays in dispensing
the antiretroviral drugs continues to impede access to this lifesaving
program. Children, an estimated 40 percent of rape and attempted rape
survivors, are especially harmed by government failure to address their
needs.
Social and Economic Rights
South Africa’s economic disparities contribute to human rights concerns.
It is estimated that twenty-two million people—roughly half the
population, the great majority of them Africans—live in extreme poverty.
About a fifth of the South African population receives government
financial assistance.
People living in rural areas apparently have particular difficulty in
accessing their rights to health care and social services. Regarding education,
although access to public schooling for children is widely available
and enrollment has increased since 1994, there are wide disparities
in schools’ resources: about 40 percent of state-run schools—mostly
those in rural areas—have no electricity and approximately 30 percent
no clean water. Physical access to education in rural areas is of particular
concern. Some learners must walk up to thirty kilometers each day
to and from school, exposing them to dangers such as sexual violence
and contributing to high drop-out rates. The government established a
ministerial committee on rural education in May to examine concerns
about schooling in rural South Africa.
South Africa’s Regional Role
In the promotion of human rights, democracy and peace, South Africa
has played a key role in the first year of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, and is hosting the Pan-African Parliament. South
Africa has increased its role in seeking peaceful solutions to conflicts in
Africa by providing military personnel in peace support operations, and
monitoring and supporting post-conflict reconstruction in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Burundi and conflict resolution in
Darfur, Sudan.