South Africa
The killing of 34 miners at the Lonmin Platinum Mine in Marikana, North West
Province, on August 16, 2012, shocked South Africans and highlighted increasing
concerns over police brutality and underlying grievances over the government’s
failure to fulfill basic economic and social rights.
Despite South Africa’s strong constitutional protections for human rights and its
relative success at providing basic services, the government is struggling to
meet public demands for better realization of economic and social rights. In
addition, financial mismanagement, corruption, and concerns about the capacity
of leadership and administration—especially at the local government level—
have contributed to further delaying the progressive realization of economic and
social rights.
Concerns that the ruling African National Congress (ANC) is increasingly
encroaching on civil and political rights are exemplified by the Protection of
State Information Bill which the National Assembly passed in 2011, but has not
yet become law. Debates over its constitutionality regarding its impact on freedom
of expression continued in 2012. At this writing, the Traditional Courts Bill,
which parliament was considering, may have negative implications for vulnerable
groups such as women, children, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) persons to access justice and other rights.
The Killing of Mine Workers
The tragedy at Lonmin Platinum Mine, which resulted in the death of 34 miners
when police opened fire on illegal strikers, is one of the worst death tolls in violent
protests since 1994. The tragedy highlighted the poverty and the grievances
of many in the mining industry, the historical bastion of South Africa’s migrant
labor system.
The government acted swiftly to respond to public outcry and established a judicial
commission of inquiry to ascertain the facts and investigate the conduct of
the mining company, the trade unions, and the police. The inquiry will investigate
the nature, extent, and application of any standing orders by police that gave rise to the tragedy, as well as whether the use of force was reasonable and
justified in the circumstances.
Freedom of Expression
The controversial Protection of State Information Bill aims to regulate the classification,
protection, and dissemination of state information, weighing state
interests against the importance of freedom of expression. The National
Assembly passed the bill in November 2011 and amended it in 2012 in response
to criticism from civil society organizations and state institutions, such as the
South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC). Following the amendment,
section 49 of the bill was expunged. It had criminalized the disclosure of information
relating to any state security matter, even if those responsible were
unaware that the information was a matter of state security. Section 43, which
pertains to the publication of classified information, was also amended to offer
whistleblowers more protection.
However, some concerns remain, such as the bill’s relation to the Promotion of
Access to Information Act (PAIA), which is based on the constitutional right of
access to information held by the state and private bodies. Early versions of the
new law gave it precedence over the PAIA. And while amendments in 2012
deleted the clause that pertained to the bill superseding the PAIA, it remains
unclear whether it trumps the right of access to information.
The amendments improved the balance in the law between the importance of
the right to freedom of expression and the state’s interest in classifying information.
Given the bill’s contentious nature, it is almost certain that the government
itself will itself take the bill to the constitutional court for certification before it
is signed into law. If it does not do so, civil society organizations will challenge
the bill before the constitutional court.
Women’s Rights
Section 9 of South Africa’s Constitution provides strong protection for women,
prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of gender, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
and marital status. In addition to legislation such as the Promotion of Equality and Prevention Unfair Discrimination Act of 2000 and the establishment
of the Commission for Gender Equality, the government in 2010 created
the Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. This illustrated
the government’s commitment to promote and protect the rights of women and
matters related to women’s equality and empowerment.
However, the reintroduction of the Traditional Courts Bill in 2012, after the government
withdrew it in 2008 following widespread criticism, may have dire consequences
for the rights of women.
The bill aims to affirm the traditional justice system based on restorative justice
and reconciliation. As such, it emphasizes the position of traditional leaders in
the administration of justice, and effectively centralizes their power as the
arbiters of customary law. As it stood at time of writing, the bill will give traditional
leaders the authority to enforce controversial versions of customary law
such as the practice of ukutwala (forced marriage), adjudicate compliance, and
enforce penalties. The penalties are of particular concern as section 10 of the
bill imposes sanctions including fines, forced labor, and the withdrawal of customary
benefits, such as the enjoyment of communal land.
Section 4 provides for the minister of justice to appoint traditional leaders who
are recognized in the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act as
presiding officers of traditional courts. Most traditional leaders are men, and the
bill does not assign women any role in the courts. A significant concern with the
traditional justice system is its entrenchment of patriarchy, as well as discriminatory
social and economic practices, such as access to land, inheritance, and
forced marriage.
South Africa was a leading advocate for the adoption of International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention on Decent Work for Domestic Workers in 2011, but
has not yet itself ratified it. Moreover, the enforcement of its legislation covering
the estimated 1 to 1.5 million domestic workers in South Africa remains weak.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
South Africa continues to play a leading role on sexual orientation and gender
identity at the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC). A report by the Office of the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights (OHCHR), documenting violence
and discrimination against LGBT people worldwide and compiled in accordance
with a 2011 South Africa sponsored resolution on “Human Rights, Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity,” was presented to the HRC in March 2012. This
is the first time that any UN body approved a resolution affirming the rights of
LGBT persons.
Farmworkers
Following the Human Rights Watch report on the living and working conditions
of farmworkers in 2011, the government has shown a commitment to strengthening
the rights of those in the farming community. As a result, during 2012, the
government engaged extensively with civil society, academia, farmer associations,
and trade unions about a draft document on land tenure security before it
is submitted to parliament as a bill. The consultations have indicated that the
document is vague on how the nature and content of rights of farmworkers and
farm dwellers will be strengthened and protected, and will need to be more
robust to protect the rights of workers.
Addressing the tenure insecurities of farmworkers is critical to South Africa’s
overall land reform agenda.
International Justice
South Africa continued to play a leadership role in affirming the need to uphold
obligations to the International Criminal Court (ICC), although it has yet to block
African Union decisions, which call for states not to cooperate with the court in
the arrest of suspect Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir. The first domestic criminal
case in South Africa for international crimes committed in Zimbabwe also
commenced, although it was initially challenged by South’s Africa’s police and
prosecuting authority.
Rights of Refugees
In defiance of court orders, the Department of Home Affairs closed three of its
seven Refugee Reception Offices, which caused a crisis for asylum-seekers’ and refugees’ access to asylum and refugee procedures. The closures are part of the
department’s plan to move asylum-processing to the country’s borders, which
has limited access to work, adequate shelter, and assistance for asylum seekers.
Key International Actors
South Africa’s role as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council ended
in December. Its tenure on the Security Council was marked by erratic stances on
human rights concerns, particularly regarding UN engagement on Libya and Syria.
South Africa abstained from voting on a draft UN security resolution threatening
UN action in Syria in July 2012.