South Africa
Emerging from a history of institutionalized racial inequality, South Africa has
made admirable progress in transforming the state and society to ensure respect
for fundamental rights, including freedom of expression, an independent judiciary,
and free and fair elections. Nevertheless, widespread poverty, unemployment,
persistently high levels of violent crime, and gender inequality continue to
inhibit the full enjoyment of human rights.
Poverty in South Africa has a strong rural dimension: the rural poor suffer from
higher unemployment rates, lower educational attainment, and lower access to
essential services. South Africa’s Bill of Rights provides for binding and justiciable
rights for all South Africans to education, housing, health care, food, water,
and social security. A priority concern for the nongovernmental human rights sector
in South Africa is to ensure that the government continues to address the progressive
realization of socioeconomic rights and to hold the government accountable
to fulfill these rights as binding obligations rather than programmatic aspirations.
Socioeconomic Rights
Under South Africa’s constitution, every child has the right to basic education.
Serious concerns persist regarding the quality of rural education: many farm
schools are staffed by unqualified teachers, and lack resources and infrastructure.
State schools are required to waive fees for families that are unable to afford
them, yet some local administrators refuse to do so. This contributes to de facto
discrimination against very poor children and those from families affected by
HIV/AIDS, who may consequently be excluded from attending school.
South Africa has undertaken commendable housing and land initiatives, including
national housing subsidy schemes. However, many people continue to live in
poor conditions in informal settlements, without access to basic services. In 2007
urban evictions were carried out without due warning or provision for relocation
or compensation. Commercial farm workers remain particularly vulnerable to eviction.
In September the South African Human Rights Commission conducted public
hearings to assess land tenure security for farm workers on commercial farms.
Access to public healthcare services and the quality of care provided remain inadequate,
despite policy and legislation governing this sector. Many provincial hospitals
in South Africa are dilapidated and lack sufficient trained staff, drugs, and
supplies. In September Dr. Nokuzolo Ntshona, superintendant of Cecilia
Makewane hospital in the Eastern Cape, was dismissed by the Eastern Cape
Department of Health for “breaching protocol” after her investigation into, subsequent
public criticism of, and letter to the president about appalling conditions
and high infant mortality rates in Frere hospital. Her actions were followed by
national media investigation and widespread publicity. The South African Medical
Association affirmed that her whistleblowing about hospital conditions was an
ethical and responsible intervention. South Africa’s Protected Disclosures Act,
2000, is intended to protect whistleblowers from retaliation in both the public
and private sectors.
Inequitable access to antiretroviral treatment (ART) and lack of support services
for people with HIV/AIDS, particularly for prisoners and people in rural areas,
remain inadequately addressed by the government. The majority of prisons are
unauthorized to distribute ART on-site. In 2006, after a protracted legal struggle
and a hunger strike by hundreds of HIV-positive inmates, Westville Prison authorities
were ordered by a High Court judgment to provide HIV testing and ART to prisoners
in need. The prison was subsequently accredited by the Department of
Health as an ART distribution site.
Refugees and Migrants
Many asylum seekers in South Africa continue to encounter procedural obstacles
and administrative delays throughout the refugee status determination process
and face arbitrary arrest, detention, mistreatment, and extortion by immigration
and police officers. In August 2007 South Africa’s parliamentary committee on
home affairs condemned conditions in the country’s largest refugee reception
centre, Marabastad, in Pretoria, reporting that the center was filthy, overcrowded,
and understaffed. The government subsequently agreed to upgrade this center,
and has recognized the need to address corruption and expedite the administrative
process for asylum applications.
Political repression and the economic crisis in Zimbabwe continue to cause a significant
number of Zimbabwean nationals to seek entry into South Africa. Officials
at the Lindela repatriation centre, situated near a South Africa-Zimbabwe border
post in Limpopo province, are detaining illegal immigrants in overcrowded detention
facilities and deporting large numbers of Zimbabweans without screening for
refugee status. South Africa’s Department of Home Affairs maintains that most
Zimbabweans entering South Africa are economic migrants and cannot be classified
as refugees as they are not facing persecution in their own country. Human
rights groups dispute this.
Large numbers of Zimbabwean and Mozambican migrants continue to seek seasonal
work in South Africa’s commercial agricultural sector. Although South
Africa’s employment law affords rights to foreign migrant workers, many farmers
openly disregard the minimum wage, do not pay overtime, and make unlawful
deductions from workers’ wages. Undocumented migrants are also frequently
harassed by police and immigration officials and are subject to assault and extortion
during farm raids.
Women’s Rights
Strong women’s organizations in South Africa continue to challenge the patriarchal
attitudes that persist in society and to pressure the government to address
gender-based abuses and discrimination. At the 2007 Women’s Parliament,
South Africa’s deputy president acknowledged the need for government to create
partnerships with civil society to expedite the implementation of the country’s
progressive legislation.
Rape and other forms of gender-based violence continue to be under-reported
and complaints often receive inadequate response by police officials. The government
has established 52 specialized sexual offenses courts throughout the country,
which have had relative success in improving conviction rates. In close proximity
to these courts, the government has also established Thuthuzela Care
Centers where survivors of rape are able to report the crime, access specialist
investigators and prosecutors, and obtain medical care and counseling.
On May 22, Parliament passed the Sexual Offences and Related Matters
Amendment Bill, which acknowledges the high incidence of sexual offenses committed
in South Africa, broadens the definition of rape, and acknowledges the
link between rape and HIV infection. The bill provides for victim-initiated compulsory
HIV testing for rape perpetrators; compels test results to be made available
to the victims; and entitles victims to receive, at state expense, post-exposure
prophylaxis (PEP), a course of antiretroviral drugs that can reduce the risk of contracting
HIV by up to 80 percent if taken within 72 hours of exposure. However,
although the bill mandates designated public health facilities to provide rape survivors
with PEP, it does not mention other treatment or counseling services and
makes access to PEP dependent on the survivor laying criminal charges.
Important recommendations by the South African Law Reform Commission that
would have improved conviction rates by improving the court experiences of
claimants have not been included in the bill.
Children’s Rights
The Children’s Act (2005) remains to be enacted, although certain parts of the Act
came into effect in July 2007, including provisions that grant children from age 12
the right to access medical services for HIV testing and treatment and that allow
children to acquire contraceptives without parental consent. The Act prohibits
child trafficking, for which South Africa continues to be a source and destination
country, and makes the UN Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons applicable
as part of South African law. Delays in passing the Act have been caused by parliamentary
debate over the complementary Children’s Amendment Bill (2007),
which was passed on November 6 and is currently being reviewed by the National
Council of Provinces. The bill scales up delivery of social welfare services for children,
provides for well resourced strategies to facilitate child protection in
instances of abuse and neglect, and provides greater integrated support to childheaded
households, as determined by a vulnerability criterion.
Sexual violence, corporal punishment, bullying, gang-related activities, and occasional
murders continue to occur in some South African schools. In September
Parliament proposed that legislation to curb violence in schools be included in
the Education Laws Amendment Bill, currently under consideration.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Although South Africa’s constitution outlaws discrimination based on sexual orientation,
and same-sex marriage has been legalized, gay and lesbian people
remain vulnerable. In 2007 a spate of homophobia-induced murders of lesbians
prompted the South African Human Rights Commission to develop a program of
action to combat escalating hate crimes and determine whether South Africa
needs legislation in this regard. The commission recommended concerted action
from the criminal justice system. Nongovernmental organizations have recommended
that diversity sensitization should be part of a preventative curriculum in
schools.
International Role
South Africa continues to play a prominent role in international affairs. It actively
supported the establishment of the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights,
which began its first session in September 2007, and has been involved in conflict
mediation in the DRC, Western Sahara, Côte d’Ivoire, and other countries. In
March the Southern African Development Community mandated South Africa to
mediate in the Zimbabwean crisis, where it has focused on encouraging dialogue
between the Zimbabwean government and the main opposition party. South
Africa continues to contribute to peacekeeping efforts in the DRC, Burundi,
Sudan, and along the Ethiopian-Eritrean border.
South Africa’s voting record during its first year as a non-permanent member of
the United Nations Security Council has been criticized. In January it opposed a
resolution condemning human rights abuses by the military junta in Burma, on
the grounds that domestic human rights violations in Burma do not constitute a
threat to international peace and security and, therefore, that the matter does not
fall within Security Council jurisdiction. In the UN Human Rights Council South
Africa has been criticized by Council members and the international media for
attempting to block discussion of human rights abuses in Zimbabwe and for voting
to end monitoring of rights abuses in Iran and Uzbekistan.