SFLK? A=I@:8
South Africa continues to grapple with corruption, growing social and economic
inequalities, and the weakening of state institutions by partisan appointments
and one-party dominance. Attacks on freedom of expression, particularly
attempts by the ruling African National Congress (ANC) to tamper with media
independence, raised serious concerns about the government’s commitment to
the protection of basic civil and political rights. In April 2011, images of the brutal,
public murder by the police of Andries Tatane during a peaceful protest in
Ficksburg to demand better service delivery elicited public ire regarding police
brutality. Despite these concerns, institutions of democracy, among them the
South African Human Rights Commission and the Public Protector, remain highly
active.
The Foreign Policy White Paper, published in late May, failed to clarify the
thrust of South Africa’s international agenda, dashing hopes that a country with
strong constitutional protections of rights at home is ready to assume a leadership
position on the realization of rights worldwide.
Freedom of Expression
Following year-long deliberations, the Ad-Hoc Committee on the Protection of
Information Bill tabled a new draft for parliamentary approval in September
2011. The bill is designed to regulate classification procedures of state information
and proposes prison sentences of 15 to 20 years for publishing information
deemed to threaten national security. Public engagement on the bill has been
vociferous, with civil society arguing that, if promulgated, the bill would silence
the media and whistleblowers and condone overreaching state secrecy. Despite
improvements to the bill—such as the establishment of an independent
Classification Review Panel and limitations on institutions that can classify
information—it remains flawed. The absence of a public interest defense, permitting
the publication of information that serves the public, is its most notable
weakness. Public pressure—coordinated through the Right2Know Campaign, a
civil society network of organizations opposed to the Protection of Information
Bill—forced the ANC’s bill on September 20 to allow for further consultation.
Concerns regarding the ANC’s attempts to curtail freedom of media persist. The
party periodically invokes the spectre of a media appeals tribunal, which would
see statutory regulation of the media. Also of concern is ANC’s growing hold
over the country’s public broadcaster, the South African Broadcasting
Corporation.
Vulnerable Workers
Despite legislation protecting the rights of workers and being highly organized,
workers in various sectors of the economy continue to face severe challenges;
farmworkers are particularly vulnerable. The failure of the government to
enforce labor and tenure laws renders them defenseless against powerful
employers. Human Rights Watch’s research in the Western Cape, the secondrichest
province with the largest number of farmworkers in South Africa, uncovered
a number of exploitative conditions under which farmworkers interviewed
work and live. These range from occupational health and safety hazards,
including exposure to harmful pesticides; evictions without access to shortterm
shelter and poor housing conditions on farms; difficulties in forming or
joining unions; and unfair labor conditions, such as pay below minimum wage.
In response to a report that was the outcome of the Human Rights Watch
research, and the efforts of other civil society organizations, several South
African government officials committed to addressing abuses and enforcing
labor laws, in spite of negative reactions from farm owners.
Women’s Rights
South Africa’s maternal mortality ratio has more than quadrupled in the last
decade, increasing from 150 to 625 deaths per 100,000 live births between
1998 and 2007, with HIV playing a role in many of the deaths. The United
Nations estimates that 4,500 women die each year in South Africa due to preventable
and treatable pregnancy-related causes. This is despite South Africa’s
wealth, reasonably good health infrastructure, and strong legal and policy
framework, which includes a constitutional guarantee of the right to health.
Generally poor health outcomes—especially maternal and child mortality—are a
result of various factors, including fragmentation; inequalities between the public and private health sectors regarding the availability of financial and
human resources; the accessibility and delivery of health services; and a high
disease burden, particularly HIV/AIDS. The government’s failure to provide
effective oversight for the implementation of existing reproductive and sexual
health-related laws and policies contributes to South Africa’s high and increasing
maternal death rate, as does a lack of accountability for recurrent problems
in the health system, including abuses committed by health personnel.
The country’s women and girls continue to live with insecurity despite efforts to
curb violence against women, specifically sexual violence, which has been on
the rise. Several studies indicate that the failure of the criminal justice system
to investigate and punish sexual violence has created a culture of impunity for
rape. The rulings of magistrates and judges sometimes trivialize the gravity of
rape. Judge Mogoeng Mogoeng’s nomination and subsequent appointment as
chief justice by President Jacob Zuma could erode the gains that have been
made in addressing violence against women. Many civil society groups have
accused Mogoeng of undermining the rights of women and girls by issuing
lenient sentences in cases of rape and domestic violence, and invoking in his
rulings myths about rape that often blame the victims and excuse perpetrators.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
During the 17th UN Human Rights Council session, South Africa successfully
pushed through the adoption of the first-ever UN resolution on sexual orientation
and gender identity. This action affirmed South Africa’s endorsement of the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people worldwide, but
does not address the concerns of the LGBT community at home. A 2011 Human
Rights Watch report found that, despite the country’s progressive legislation,
discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity is widespread
in the society and evident in the behavior of government officials,
including the police and teachers. Black lesbians and transgender men are
especially vulnerable and live under constant threat of verbal, physical, and
sexual violence from acquaintances and strangers. Civil society pressure following
recent cases of rape, torture, and murder of black lesbians and transgender
people has prompted the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to form a multi-sectoral task team to formulate legal and judicial
responses to violence against members of the LGBT community.
Refugee Rights
In 2011 South Africa prevented Zimbabwean asylum seekers from entering the
country, and forcibly returned registered Zimbabwean asylum seekers because
they did not possess “travel documents,” an unlawful requirement under international
law. On June 1 South Africa closed its largest refugee reception office
in Johannesburg. Local groups and Human Rights Watch raised concerns this
would further exacerbate registration problems faced by refugees and asylum
seekers, lead to increased unlawful deportation, and further increase the backlogs
in a system already struggling to process over 250,000 cases.
Some South African officials indicated that the country was considering moving
refugee reception offices to its borders with Mozambique and Zimbabwe and
detaining all asylum seekers while their cases were being considered. Local
civil society voiced concerns this would bring chaos and possibly a humanitarian
crisis to the South Africa-Zimbabwe border area in particular and lead to a
sharp deterioration of already poor decision-making, which would likely lead to
increased refoulement of genuine refugees.
International Role
South Africa’s role as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council has
been mixed. In Cote d’Ivoire, for example, as forces loyal to former President
Laurent Gbagbo were killing Ivorians known or suspected of supporting rival
and current President Alassane Ouattara, South Africa chose to focus on the
validity of the contested November 2010 elections, which it claimed were inconclusive.
That foot-dragging stalled international and regional efforts to resolve
the electoral crisis and protect civilians under siege.
In the case of Libya, South Africa surprised its critics by voting in favor of UN
Security Council Resolutions 1970 and 1973; the latter permitted military action
against to protect civilians Muammar Gaddafi’s regime. Zuma was harshly criticized
by his African Union peers, as well as some within his administration and the ANC, for this vote. Zuma later backtracked, claiming that South Africa was
misled into supporting a NATO-led, Western regime-change agenda. Afterward
the Zuma administration failed to criticize the abusive actions of the Libyan
regime, as the human rights situation in the country deteriorated. Since then
the government of South Africa has used the Libya situation to explain its failure
to support UN Security Council action on country situations such as Syria.
In an unprecedented development President Zuma’s more assertive leadership
as Southern African Development Community (SADC) mediator on Zimbabwe
saw SADC taking a tougher stance against President Robert Mugabe’s continued
repressive rule. At a SADC meeting in Livingstone, Zambia, in March SADC
leaders challenged Mugabe on his failure to institute agreed reforms under the
Global Political Agreement. Later Mugabe launched a scathing attack against
Zuma and his mediation panel for interfering in Zimbabwe’s affairs.