South Africa
South Africa’s pro-human rights constitution, stable government, democratic
institutions, independent judiciary, and strong economy mean it has great potential
to become a global human rights leader. However, government efforts to realize
this potential at home have been inconsistent, and recent trends suggest possible
constriction of civil and political rights. In addition, inadequate policies and
poor implementation of good ones has slowed the realization of social and economic
rights for many South Africans.
In the international arena, South Africa’s government has refrained in recent years
from condemning abuses in China, Sri Lanka, Iran, Burma, Sudan, and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, dashing hopes that it would be a reliable partner
in promoting human rights. South Africa’s foreign policy role will be in the international
spotlight again following its assumption of a seat on the United Nations
Security Council on January 1, 2011.
Freedom of Expression
Two separate but interrelated developments in 2010 led to widespread criticism
and concern that the government is trying to limit freedom of expression. Ahead
of its policy conference in September the ruling African National Congress party
(ANC) resurrected a 2007 resolution pushing for the establishment of a Media
Appeals Tribunal, arguing that media cannot be counted on to regulate themselves,
and that “freedom of the press is not an absolute right and must be balanced
against individuals’ rights to privacy and human dignity.” The ANC’s proposal
seeks to establish a regulatory mechanism accountable to the ANC-dominated
Parliament, which would constitute a back-door path to censorship and
suppression of dissent.
On August 4 Mzilikazi Wa-Afrika, a prominent journalist with the Sunday Times
who had exposed corruption by officials, was arrested without a warrant by 20
policemen in six vans. He was then taken to a secret location in Mpumalanga and
interrogated at 2 a.m. without a lawyer. The police also searched his home and
took notebooks without a search warrant. Wa-Afrika was eventually released on
R5,000 (US$725) bail after his newspaper went to the High Court; the charges cited upon his arrest have since been dropped. The incident heightened fears
that such politically motivated intimidation of the press could become the norm if
the ANC-proposed tribunal is established.
In April 2010 the Department of State Security tabled a draft of the Protection of
Information Bill (PIB) for parliamentary consideration. In 2008 Parliament first
tabled and rejected the bill—which aims to replace the existing, expansive 1982
apartheid-era law that prevents and penalizes disclosure of state secrets—for
being too draconian. Parliament instructed the Department of State Security to
revise the bill in line with the constitution. But when it was re-presented in July
2010, offending elements of the bill had been retained and even made harsher.
The PIB currently gives the government sweeping powers to classify information
and impose jail terms of up to 25 years for publishing classified information. It
sets no limits on which officials or state bodies can classify information, and has
no clear criteria for classifying information. The bill also extends the protection of
secrecy to commercial entities, exempts intelligence agencies from scrutiny, and
imposes serious punitive measures against those who disclose information.
If enacted as currently written, the bill would seriously impede the free flow of
information, erode the right of access to information, and violate key constitutional
provisions. The Right to Know Campaign, which represents a broad spectrum of
civil society groups, has pressured to squash the bill in its current form.
Parliament gave the adhoc committee tasked with finalizing the bill until January
28, 2011 to incorporate all inputs and present a final draft.
Refugees and Migrants
On May 11 the Consortium for Refugees and Migrants in South Africa (CoRMSA)
reported 10 incidents of xenophobic violence in Siyathemba, Atteridgeville,
Mamelodi, Orange Farm, and Sasolburg, where large crowds looted foreignowned
shops.
CoRMSA also reported mounting threats of violence following the football World
Cup, held in South Africa in June and July, leading thousands of migrants—mainly
Zimbabweans—to flee South Africa or relocate to other communities. Responding
to public pressure, the government moved swiftly, establishing a heavy police presence and deploying the military in Alexandria, Katlehong, and other townships
where xenophobic violence had been predicted. The anticipated violence
did not materialize, but migrants in South Africa continue to report scattered incidents
of xenophobic attacks.
In September South Africa moved to “regularize the presence of Zimbabweans in
South Africa” by ending the special dispensation for Zimbabwean nationals that
the government introduced in April 2009, and resuming deportations of those
without the new special permits. After the January 2011 lifting of the moratorium
on deporting Zimbabweans, they have two options to lawfully enter and remain in
South Africa: apply for asylum, or apply for a temporary residence permit under
the Immigration Rules’ work, study and business provisions. Most are unlikely to
qualify under either regime. South Africa’s Department of Home Affairs already
had a backlog of 309,794 unresolved applications at the end of 2009, according
to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
Socioeconomic Rights
Millions of South Africans suffer from inadequate access to shelter, water, education,
and health care. South Africa is unlikely to meet the UN health-related
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and is one of only eight countries in the
region where the rate of maternal deaths seems to be increasing. The South
African government estimates that the maternal mortality ratio was 625 deaths
per 100,000 live births in 2007, up from 150 deaths per 100,000 live births in
1998. The under-five mortality rate was 104 deaths per 1000 live births in 2007,
up from 59 deaths in 1998, while the infant mortality rate was 53 deaths per
1,000 live births in 2007, compared to 54 in 2001.
South Africa also has one of the world’s largest populations affected by HIV/AIDS,
with more than 5 million people living with HIV, and more than 1 million needing
AIDS treatment. The country’s response to the epidemic has significantly
improved under Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi. On April 25 the government
launched the HIV Testing and Counseling campaign (HTC), which aims to see 15
million people accepting voluntary HIV testing and counseling by 2011, and 1.5
million receiving antiretroviral treatment by June 2011. However, weaknesses in At a high-level meeting on Sudan in September, organized by UN Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, International Relations Minister Maite Nkoane-Mashabane
appealed for international support to guarantee a peaceful referendum outcome
in January in South Sudan and Abyei. South Africa has also supported the work of
the AU Panel on Sudan and contributed to the joint AU-UN operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
In 2010 South Africa lobbied aggressively and successfully to regain a non-permanent
seat at the UN Security Council, which will allow it to exert influence on key
international issues. Its past performance in multilateral institutions has been
disappointing from a human rights perspective. As a member of the Security
Council in 2007-2008, South Africa opposed a resolution condemning abuses by
the military junta in Burma, while at the UN Human Rights Council in 2007, South
Africa attempted to block discussions of rights abuses in Zimbabwe and voted to
end monitoring of abuses in Iran and Uzbekistan. South Africa’s seat on the UN
Security Council beginning in 2011 affords the country an opportunity to translate
its constitutional commitment to human rights into critical involvement on international
issues where protecting human rights is a central concern.