South Africa
On May 9, 2009, Jacob Zuma was inaugurated as the new president of South
Africa, replacing interim president Kgalema Motlanthe, after elections that were
widely viewed as free and fair. The new president faces numerous challenges in
the midst of an economic recession—including widespread poverty, unemployment,
high levels of violent crime, and gender inequality—which continue to
undermine the country’s human rights environment, especially for the most vulnerable
in society.
South Africa continues to play a prominent role in international affairs, in particular
on the African continent, but faces many challenges in addressing the inherent
contradictions between enhancing its domestic and regional trade and investment
interests, and retaining its post-apartheid reputation as a proponent of
human rights and international justice. Unlike former President Thabo Mbeki,
President Zuma has proved more willing to publicly criticize abuses in countries
such as Sri Lanka, Burma, and Zimbabwe. This is a positive change of tone.
Refugees and Migrants
South Africa’s immigration system has struggled to deal adequately with the millions
of asylum seekers and migrants who have entered the country—up to an
estimated 1.5 million of whom are Zimbabwean. Thousands fleeing the political
and economic crisis in Zimbabwe who have applied for asylum in South Africa
have faced unlawful deportation.
On April 3, 2009, then-Minister of Home Affairs Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula
announced a positive shift in migrant policy toward Zimbabweans, which included
visa-free entry and “special dispensation permits” to legalize Zimbabweans’
stay and give them work rights and access to basic healthcare and education. The
Department of Home Affairs at the same time announced an immediate moratorium
on the deportation of Zimbabweans from South Africa. However, the government
has yet to implement the special dispensation process, which would lessen
the vulnerability of Zimbabweans to violence and exploitation both in their homeland
and in South Africa.
After xenophobic attacks against foreign nationals in May 2008 left 62 dead and
a further 50,000 internally displaced, the government still faces significant challenges
in addressing issues of reintegration, resettlement, or xenophobia in local
communities. While the government has sought to quickly reintegrate the victims
of that violence, some have faced further violence when returning to their communities,
and others have been unable to move back for fear of repeat attacks. The
government has failed to implement an independent commission of inquiry into
the violence, and the pace of holding accountable those responsible for the
attacks has been exceedingly slow: According to a report by the Consortium for
Refugees and Migrants in South Africa in June 2009, the government had prosecuted
only 469 of those responsible for the attacks out of 1,627 originally arrested,
and of those prosecuted only 70 were found guilty. Convictions were mostly
for the lesser crimes of assault or theft; there were no convictions for murder or
rape, despite NGOs documenting many such cases during the attacks.
Health Issues and the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
The progressive realization of socioeconomic rights poses a significant challenge
for Zuma’s government. A report in 2009 by the South African Human Rights
Commission, for example, pointed to poor service delivery in the public healthcare
system throughout the country.
People with HIV/AIDS suffer from inequitable access to antiretroviral treatment
and a lack of support services, despite the promulgation of a new HIV/AIDS plan
adopted in 2007. The AIDS epidemic has fueled South Africa’s worsening tuberculosis
crisis, as well as a rise in maternal deaths, which also result from the country’s
inadequate public sector reproductive health services.
For migrants, high rates of HIV both in countries of origin and in South Africa,
compounded by the risks related to migration make HIV prevention, diagnosis,
and treatment a major public health concern. Human Rights Watch research, as
well as reports from other NGOs and media outlets, has identified a striking gap
between South Africa’s inclusive policies and the reality of access to healthcare
for refugees, asylum seekers, and especially undocumented migrants. Barriers to
healthcare include lack of information, cultural and linguistic barriers, lack of documentation,
user fees, and discrimination.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
South Africa has in place legislation and national mechanisms to address gender
inequality, including the introduction of a government ministry dedicated to
women, youth, children, and disabled people. Yet the gap between the material
status of women and the government’s stated commitment remains huge. Levels
of violence against women and girls in South Africa are shockingly high.
South Africa has the highest rates in the world of rape reported to the police. A
survey released in June by the Medical Research Council of South Africa found
that 28 percent of men surveyed had raped a woman or girl; one in 20 said they
had raped a woman or girl in the past year. Arrest and conviction rates of rape
perpetrators are extremely low, and consequently women and girls who experience
these violations are denied justice, factors that contribute to the normalization
of rape and violence against women and girls in South African society.
Women and girls who have been raped face numerous obstacles in accessing
healthcare and other forms of assistance, such as delays in the provision of medical
treatment, an absence of counselling services, and lengthy waits for medicolegal
examination. Despite the high rates of rape, many health facilities do not
provide post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) services. NGOs working on women’s
health rights continue to receive reports from healthcare workers and survivors of
rape who have been unable to access timely PEP services in the public health
system.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Although South Africa’s constitution outlaws discrimination based on sexual orientation,
and same-sex marriage has been legalized, gay and lesbian people
remain vulnerable. In particular, incidents of violence against black lesbian
women, and “corrective rape” in particular, continue to be reported with growing
frequency. The South African Human Rights Commission and other NGOs have
recommended that the criminal justice system needs to take concerted action to
deal with hate crimes in the country, something that the government has yet to
do.
International Role
South Africa continues to play a prominent role in international affairs, especially
on the African continent. South Africa has a significant peacekeeping presence in
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and is part of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID). It has played a positive role in the
Burundi peace process.
As chair of the Southern African Development Community (SADC), South Africa
brokered the recent power-sharing agreement in Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe’s proximity
to South Africa means that it will remain a top priority for the South African government.
President Zuma has been more outspoken than former President Mbeki
about the political crisis in Zimbabwe. For example, during a visit to Zimbabwe in
August, Zuma publicly acknowledged that progress in implementing the powersharing
agreement between President Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe African
National Union–Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai’s
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) had been slow and that outstanding
issues needed to be addressed, implicitly due to ZANU-PF’s failure to honor many
of its commitments under the agreement. Zuma also played an active role in
introducing the Zimbabwe situation to the agenda of the annual SADC heads of
state summit in Kinshasa, DRC. Regrettably, South Africa’s partners in the region
have failed to ensure that the Zimbabwe power-sharing agreement is fully implemented.
The new international relations ministry under President Zuma has retained South
Africa’s focus on strengthening regional mechanisms and South-South cooperation.
At the same time, unlike under Mbeki, recent statements and actions by the
Zuma administration have indicated a shift toward respect for human rights as an
important pillar of foreign policy. For example, in 2009 the South African government
issued strong statements on Burma and Sri Lanka: it criticised the arrest of
Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma and called for her immediate release, and expressed
concerns about government actions and the humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka.
South Africa has one of the world’s most progressive constitutions and has long
been a proponent of international justice and ending impunity for serious international
crimes. In July 2009 South Africa showed clear leadership on this issue when the director general in the International Affairs and Cooperation Ministry,
Dr. Ayanda Ntsaluba, reiterated South Africa’s commitment to the International
Criminal Court and stated that South Africa would respect its obligation to cooperate
with the ICC, including in carrying out arrest warrants for sitting Sudanese
president Omar al-Bashir. As the leading African democracy, South Africa remains
well placed to play a positive role in encouraging fellow African Union states that
are party to the Rome Statute of the ICC to maintain their support for effective
international justice. African and international civil society also looks to South
Africa to challenge those African states that continue to push the continent to
cease cooperation with the ICC.