Zambia
Zambia is at a political crossroads after President Levy Mwanawasa died in
August 2008. Largely credited with Zambia’s economic recovery, including growth
of more than five percent per year since 2002, Mwanawasa had also undertaken
several positive steps to address the AIDS crisis in the country.
Presidential elections in October 2008 to choose Mwanawasa’s successor resulted
in a narrow victory for his former vice president, Rupiah Banda of the
Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (MMD). In his inaugural speech, Banda
announced that Zambia would continue its pro-market economic policies and
anti-corruption programs, work to attract foreign investment, and strive to
become a middle-income country by 2030.
Presidential Elections
Voter turnout was markedly low, with only 45 percent of registered voters going to
the polls. The Electoral Commission of Zambia (ECZ) announced that Banda won
40 percent of the contested vote against 38 percent for his closest rival, opposition
Patriotic Front (PF) leader Michael Sata. The bulk of support for Banda and
the MMD came from rural areas, where the MMD subsidized fertilizer supplies to
enhance food security prior to the elections. Support for Sata, who ran on an antipoverty
ticket and led the polls during the first two days of counting, came from
urban voters, particularly in the capital Lusaka and the Copperbelt.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) electoral observer mission
declared the elections free and fair, and the Foundation for Democratic Process
(FODEP), a local electoral watchdog—described the results as consistent with the
findings of their observers at polling stations. However, Sata accused the MMD of
rigging the vote, citing irregularities such as late voting in two constituencies in
Western Province. The Electoral Commission said this was the result of the late
arrival of electoral staff and ballot papers due to transportation problems. Sata
also alleged that the MMD had inflated the figures in its favor in the party’s
stronghold areas, citing inconsistencies between vote tallies and the number of
registered voters. Refusing to accept the result, the Patriotic Front launched a
legal challenge and demanded a recount in 78 of the 180 constituencies.
There was heavy police presence, especially in Lusaka, to pre-empt violence,
given that the 2006 general elections saw violent clashes involving police and PF
supporters in Lusaka and the Copperbelt after results from rural constituencies
indicated that Mwanawasa would win those elections.
Minor riots erupted in the Copperbelt and in a couple of townships in Lusaka,
after an ECZ update on the evening of November 1 indicated that Banda was likely
to win the presidential race. In Lusaka, opposition protestors reportedly looted
and burned makeshift shops and stoned motor vehicles. The police used teargas
to disperse the protestors and arrested 14 opposition party members who have
since been charged with riotous behavior and conduct likely to breach peace.
Constitutional Reform
Zambia is undergoing a constitutional review process, initiated in 2002, to
address serious gaps in its 1996 constitution, such as the absence of protections
for economic, social, children’s and women’s rights in its associated Bill of
Rights. The new draft constitution rectifies these shortcomings but there has been
much controversy on the review process.
The MMD government has opposed holding a constitutional conference, arguing
that it would be too costly, given that a national referendum would be expected
to follow. The government has insisted that Parliament is the most appropriate
body to adopt the new constitution. While, the opposition—mainly PF and the
Oasis Forum, an alliance of NGOs and churches—has demanded that the new
constitution be adopted by a conference to avoid any possible manipulation by
the party in power, and to ensure the widest possible popular support.
In response, the MMD government pushed through the controversial
Constitutional Conference Act in August 2007, which set up a standing National
Constitutional Conference, (NCC) but which also expanded presidential powers
and bypasses a constitutional requirement for a national referendum at the end
of the consultative process. However, the Oasis Forum has dismissed the NCC as
unconstitutional. Opposition leader Michael Sata instructed PF members of parliament
not to participate in the NCC and subsequently dismissed 26 Patriotic
Front MPs who joined it.
Civil and Political Rights
Zambia’s Human Rights Commission reported in 2007 that unlawful deprivation
of life; unlawful detentions, poor and life-threatening prison conditions, police
brutality, and torture continue to be everyday occurrences in Zambia’s police cells
and prisons. The chair of the Commission, Pixie Yangailo, also said people are
generally subjected to unacceptable delays in receiving justice due to lack of
resources and capacity.
The Zambian government has restricted the right to freedom of expression, especially
in relation to the NCC. This has included threats against journalists critical
of the NCC, such as in 2007 when Mwanawasa warned critics that challenging the
National Constitutional Conference Act amounted to treason.
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) against women and children is a major
endemic problem in Zambia, especially in Lusaka and the Copperbelt, fueling the
country’s HIV pandemic and impeding women’s access to HIV treatment.
According to both a June report by Zambia’s chapter of Women in Law and
Development in Africa (WILDAF) and the Victim Support Unit (VSU)—the police
unit that addresses abuses against women and children—the true national extent
of sexual and gender-based violence in Zambia is unclear due to lack of reporting
by victims and survivors. Despite this, the VSU received reports between January
and August 2008 of 65 rape and 626 child rape cases in Lusaka alone.
While a 2005 amendment to Zambia’s penal code made child rape punishable by
a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, the country currently has no specific
SGBV legislation, and provisions in the penal code do not criminalize marital rape
and psychological abuse, among other shortcomings. In a positive development,
the Ministry of Justice, in collaboration with a number of NGOs, is working on a
draft SGBV bill, which is expected to be presented to Parliament during its
January 2009 session.
In 2008 Zambia established six new one-stop centers to provide comprehensive
legal, medical, and counselling services to victims and survivors of SGBV, with funding from the United States Agency for International Development. The centers
were expected to be fully operational in November. The Young Women’s Christian
Association, in collaboration with other NGOs and the government, has also
scaled-up the operations of the existing one-stop SGBV center in Lusaka.
While chair of the Southern African Development Community in 2007, Zambia,
along with several other countries, opted to defer for further national consultation
adoption of the SADC Gender and Development Protocol due to apparent controversy
over criminalizing marital rape, among other matters. In August 2008 SADC
finally adopted the Protocol.
HIV/AIDS
The AIDS pandemic continues to devastate Zambia’s population. According to
United Nations estimates, HIV prevalence in Zambia was 13.1 percent in 2007.
Although this represents a reduction in prevalence from one year to the next, in
real terms an estimated extra 182,228 people were living with HIV in 2007
because of population growth. Prevalence of HIV among pregnant women in 2007
was estimated to be 19.3 percent. Meanwhile, access to antiretroviral treatment in
Zambia has improved, according to the UN, from 82,030 in 2006 to 151,000 in
December 2007.
Key International Actors
Under Zambia’s SADC chair tenure between August 2007 and August 2008, the
situation in Zimbabwe was the most prominent regional issue. Mwanawasa was
one of a small number of regional leaders prepared to criticize the conduct of
Robert Mugabe’s government, unlike several other SADC leaders who remained
silent.
In May the UN Human Rights Council examined the human rights situation in
Zambia under its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. While commending
Zambia’s high-level representation and the quality of its presentation and national
report, the Council noted a series of violations, particularly concerning the
rights of women and children.