Zimbabwe
Human rights violations in Zimbabwe continued unabated in 2006. President
Robert Mugabe’s government maintained its assault on the media, the political
opposition, civil society activists, and human rights defenders. Police and state
agents continue to arbitrarily arrest and detain peaceful activists, and the latter
half of the year saw a marked increase in reports of torture and ill-treatment of
government critics while in detention.
More than a year after the government’s program of mass evictions and demolitions—
Operation Murambatsvina—tens of thousands of people continue to suffer
the catastrophic consequences. Despite numerous public statements from the
government that it would initiate a reconstruction program to address the homelessness
created by the evictions, few of the people displaced by the evictions
have received housing and many remain in need of food, water, and other forms
of assistance. In addition, the government has repeatedly hindered efforts by the
United Nations to provide emergency shelter and has subjected many of the victims
to repeated forced evictions.
The humanitarian situation of the evictees and the HIV/AIDS situation are among
problems that are being exacerbated by acute food shortages in the country. Food
security is likely to remain precarious for many vulnerable groups.
Freedom of Assembly
Peaceful protests in Zimbabwe are often violently disrupted by the police. At various
times in 2006 hundreds of peaceful demonstrators including student
activists, trade unionists, and human rights activists were arrested. On several
occasions, protestors were forced to lie down and were brutally beaten by police
with batons before their arrest. On September 25, for example, police violently
disrupted a peaceful march by some 500 activists from the National
Constitutional Assembly in Harare. Riot police armed with batons stopped the
march, asked the activists to sit down and proceeded to beat them one at a time
with batons before ordering them to leave. During the beatings a number of people
panicked, leading to a stampede that injured about 24 people, seven seriously.
The government has used repressive legislation to systematically deny activists
their right to peacefully assemble and associate. For example, most of the
activists arrested in 2006 were charged with violating the Public Order and
Security Act (POSA), which gives police wide powers regulating public gatherings,
and is also loosely interpreted by police. Tellingly, in many of the cases the
charges were later dropped and those arrested released without charge.
Freedom of Expression and Information
The government launched a new assault on the country’s remaining independent
press through a wave of criminal prosecutions and arrests. On January 24, 2006,
the authorities brought charges of operating a broadcasting service without a
license against six trustees and three employees of the privately owned radio station
Voice of the People. The charges were subsequently dismissed by the High
Court. In the same month, the government-appointed Media and Information
Commission (MIC) threatened to cancel the license of the Financial Gazette, a privately-
owned newspaper, if it did not retract a story that questioned the commission’s
independence. On January 29 the MIC refused to renew the accreditation of
15 journalists working for the Zimbabwe Independent, another privately-owned
newspaper, until the paper retracted a similar story.
Despite condemnation from civil society, in July the government introduced in
Parliament the Interception of Communications Bill, which seeks to give extraordinary
powers to Zimbabwe’s Central Intelligence Organization, the Commissioner
of Police, and the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority to intercept citizens’ phone calls
and emails without credible safeguards. The bill is currently under review by the
parliamentary Legal Committee. The Suppression of Foreign and International
Terrorism Bill, gazetted in March but withdrawn after the parliamentary Legal
Committee found some provisions to be unconstitutional (and pending resubmission
with revisions at this writing), has raised fears similar to those arising from
the Interception of Communications Bill about its potential use in silencing government
critics.
Torture and Ill-Treatment in Detention
Torture and ill-treatment in Zimbabwe’s police cells is rife. The government has
taken no clear action to halt the rising incidence of torture and ill-treatment of
opposition supporters and civil society activists while in the custody of the police
or intelligence services.
In a shocking example of police torture and ill treatment, 15 members of the
Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions were arrested and brutally assaulted by
police at Matapi police station following peaceful protests on September 13
against poor working conditions. The unionists reported that a group of five
police officers beat them with fists and batons, kicked them, banged their heads
against the wall, and verbally abused and threatened them. They were initially
denied medical treatment and access to their lawyers for 24 hours but were later
taken to a hospital where some were found to have serious injuries such as fractured
limbs. The High Court in Harare ordered an immediate investigation, but at
this writing it was unclear whether the police would comply. After the incident
President Mugabe expressed approval for the actions of the police, stating that
those who protested in the street deserved to be “thoroughly beaten.”
The authorities have also targeted student activists and in some cases subjected
them to police torture and ill-treatment while in custody. In May 2006 the authorities
reacted to a spate of student protests against unpopular government polices
with mass arrests and violence. For example, on May 29 police arrested student
leader Promise Mkwanazi and detained him at a police station in the northeastern
town of Bindura for five days without charge. Each night a group of three or
four policemen stripped Mkwanazi naked, shackled him with his hands between
his legs so he could not move, and beat him severely with batons; they also
threatened to kill him. They accused him of belonging to the opposition and of
trying to overthrow the government.
Human Rights Defenders
The authorities intensified their attacks on human rights defenders and lawyers in
an attempt to silence their condemnation of the government’s poor human rights
record. Government officials routinely accuse human rights groups of being supporters of the opposition and of receiving funds from western donors whom the
government accuses of trying to destabilize the country. Human rights defenders
and lawyers are constantly subjected to harassment, arbitrary arrests, and attacks
by the police, intelligence agents and government officials. In May two human
rights lawyers from the organization Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights were
threatened by supporters of the ruling ZANU-PF party and state agents when they
attempted to represent students arrested by the police for protesting the high
cost of student fees.
Hundreds of members of the women’s organization Women of Zimbabwe Arise
were arrested throughout the country in 2006 during peaceful protests against
the worsening social, economic, and human rights situation. Scores of the organization’s
members were subjected to ill-treatment while in custody.
HIV/AIDS
Although the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate has dropped, the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
Zimbabwe remains critical. The government’s abusive practices such as Operation
Murambatsvina as well as inadequate health and social welfare policies have
contributed to the denial of access to healthcare for hundreds of thousands of
Zimbabweans living with HIV/AIDS: some 350,000 of the 1.6 million people carrying
the virus are in immediate need of life-saving antiretroviral drugs and another
600,000 are in need of care and support. Such policies and practices risk undermining
the progress that the government has achieved thus far in addressing the
HIV/AIDS crisis.
Key International Actors
President Mugabe has persistently responded with defiance and at times contempt
to attempts to address Zimbabwe’s interrelated political, human rights,
and humanitarian crises by international partners such as South Africa and other
Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries. There is little consensus
internationally about the way forward in dealing with the crises. The South
African government remains firmly entrenched in its position of quiet diplomacy,
while European Union member states and the United States have maintained targeted
sanctions against government officials but have done little else.
Recent attempts to solve the political crisis in Zimbabwe by UN Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and SADC member countries have largely failed. A planned visit by
Annan in January 2006 to investigate the situation in the aftermath of the evictions
did not take place. Instead, at the July summit of the African Union Annan
was forced to step aside and allow former Tanzanian President Benjamin Mkapa
to deal with the crisis, at Mugabe’s insistence. Little clarity exists about what form
Mkapa’s efforts will take.
Zimbabwe’s humanitarian crisis has been worsened by the reluctance of western
donors to provide direct humanitarian assistance to the government of
Zimbabwe. More worryingly, donors have failed to heed calls for further funding
of UN humanitarian assistance programs. For example, in October 2006 the World
Food Programme declared that it was cutting food aid to Zimbabwe by two-thirds
because funding for food assistance to Zimbabwe was running out.