Zimbabwe
The continuing erosion of human rights in Zimbabwe was highlighted in
2005 by Operation Murambatsvina, the government’s program of mass evictions
and demolitions which began in May, and, which, according to the
United Nations, deprived 700,000 men, women and children of their homes,
their livelihoods, or both throughout the country. The evictions and demolitions
occurred against a background of general dissatisfaction in many of
Zimbabwe’s urban areas over the political and economic situation in the
country. The country is currently spiraling into a huge economic and political
crisis.
The government continues to introduce repressive laws that suppress criticism
of its political and economic policies. In August, parliament passed the
Constitutional Amendment Act, which gives the government the right to
expropriate land and property without the possibility of judicial appeal, and
to withdraw passports from those it deems a threat to national security.
Mass Forced Evictions and Demolitions
The government’s policy of forced evictions and demolition of homes and
informal business structures carried out in Zimbabwe’s urban areas with little
or no warning violated the rights of hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans.
Police used excessive force to destroy houses and structures and in some
cases police armed with guns and truncheons, threatened and assaulted people.
The evictions and demolitions led to widespread homelessness, lack of
freedom of movement, loss of livelihood and minimal access to food, water,
health care, education, and justice for hundreds of thousands of
Zimbabweans. Tens of thousands of homes, and hundreds of informal business
properties as well as legal housing and business structures were
destroyed without regard for the rights or welfare of those who were evicted.
The scale of destruction was unprecedented, and the victims were mainly the
poor and vulnerable in Zimbabwe’s cities and towns including widows, children,
elderly and chronically ill persons. The evictions led to the disruption of anti-retroviral therapies and treatment of opportunistic infection for those
living with HIV/AIDS.
Thousands of people remain homeless and displaced by the evictions with no
shelter and little or no access to food, water and medical assistance. To date
noone has received any housing under the Zimbabwe government’s
Operation Garikai program, ostensibly initiated to provide accommodation
to all persons made homeless by the evictions. The Zimbabwean government
has not investigated reports of excessive use of force by the police or brought
the perpetrators to justice.
Blocking of Humanitarian Assistance
The government’s refusal to cooperate with a United Nations emergency
appeal for the hundreds of thousands affected by the evictions worsened their
plight. On August 29, the U.N. Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian
Affairs Jan Egeland condemned the lack of cooperation from the government
with regard to mitigating the effects of the evictions, and accused it of hampering
efforts to aid those affected. The government continues to obstruct
the provision of humanitarian assistance by local and international humanitarian
agencies to internally displaced and evicted populations. On October
31, 2005, the U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan made a heartfelt appeal
calling on the government to allow U.N. agencies and other humanitarian
agencies access to help those made homeless by Operation Murambatsvina.
In addition, an estimated 2.9 million people across Zimbabwe were in need
of food aid by the end of September. However, despite the serious food
shortages, the government of Zimbabwe refused to make a formal appeal for
food aid from the World Food Program.
The humanitarian situation has also been exacerbated by Zimbabwe’s failing
economy. In September 2005, inflation reached 359.8 percent and unemployment
was at 80 percent. Although some reports suggest that the rate of HIV
infections has recently decreased, the issue of HIV/AIDS is still of critical
concern with almost 1.8 million people infected with HIV/AIDS (more than
20 percent of all adults) and nearly one million children orphaned. The government was saved from expulsion from the International Monetary Fund in
September when it managed to repay a total of U.S. $135 million in debts.
Elections
There has been no thaw in relations between the opposition and the ruling
party. Tensions between the two main parties were heightened by the result
of parliamentary elections which took place in March 2005. The ruling
Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front won the elections but the
opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) declared that the elections
were not free and fair. In the run up to the elections, Human Rights
Watch documented a series of human rights violations, including political
intimidation of opponents by ruling party supporters, electoral irregularities,
and the use of repressive legislation by the government. Local civil society
organizations, international organizations, including Amnesty International
and International Crisis Group, and the international community including
the European Union (E.U.), and the governments of the United Kingdom
and the United States widely criticized the elections. The African Union
(A.U.), the Southern African Development Community and South African
observer teams, however, endorsed the election results. Senate elections were
scheduled to take place on November 26, and triggered serious divisions
within the MDC over whether or not to participate in the elections. The disagreements
subsequently led to the expulsion of 26 members from the party,
who decided to contest the elections against the wishes of other party members
and leader Morgan Tsvangirai.
Repressive Legislation and Human Rights Defenders
The situation of human rights defenders and journalists in Zimbabwe
remains precarious. The Constitutional Amendment Act has been added to a
raft of laws that restrict the human rights of those who criticize the government
and try to protect human rights in Zimbabwe. Apart from allowing the
government to expropriate land and property without recourse to the courts,
the act also allows the government to withdraw passports from those it deems to be a threat to security, thus restricting the rights to freedom of movement
of any government critics or human rights defenders.
Human rights groups continue to work in a highly restrictive environment.
The government uses repressive laws such as the Public Order and Security
Act to restrict the right to freedom of assembly, association, and expression of
civil society activists and the opposition. Although President Robert Mugabe
did not sign the restrictive Non-Governmental Organization Act into law, its
existence has had a detrimental effect on the ability of human rights groups
to operate freely, as they fear that the Act may be revived and lead to their
shutting down.
Key International Actors
In response to the mass forced evictions, in May 2005 U.N. Secretary
General Kofi Annan appointed a special envoy, Anna Tibaijuka, to investigate.
Her strongly-worded report, released on July 22, concluded that the
evictions were carried out in an “indiscriminate and unjustified manner” and
recommended that those found responsible for the evictions be brought to
justice. The government of Zimbabwe strongly refuted the U.N.’s findings
and claimed that the evictions were lawful and that the U.N. had exaggerated
both the scale of the evictions and the numbers of persons affected.
Western governments, in particular the governments of the United States,
United Kingdom, and other European Union governments, also condemned
the mass evictions. Many African governments once again refused to publicly
condemn human rights violations in Zimbabwe and chose to remain silent on
the issue of the evictions. The South African government indicated that it
would await the U.N. report on the crisis before responding but did not do
so. Although the South African government has expressed some concern with
the human rights conditions in Zimbabwe, it continues to exercise a policy of
‘quiet diplomacy’ in its dealings with the government, an approach which has
to date yielded few tangible results.
Attempts by African governments and the African Union to address
Zimbabwe’s human rights crisis have so far yielded little. In August, the government of Zimbabwe refused to accept the A.U. appointment of former
president Joachim Chissano as an envoy to broker talks between the ruling
party and the opposition MDC, claiming that such talks would not be taking
place. The commendable effort by African Union Commission Chair Alpha
Oumar Konare to appoint a special envoy to investigate the evictions was
blocked by the Zimbabwe government, which refused to grant the envoy permission
to investigate, until he was forced to leave the country on July 7,
2005. The Zimbabwe government claimed that the African Union had failed
to follow protocol in sending the envoy to investigate the evictions. The
Southern African Development Community also failed to discuss Zimbabwe
at its annual summit in August. In general, there has been a lack of sustained
attention from African governments to the crisis in Zimbabwe.
The United Kingdom and other E.U. governments have provided some
humanitarian aid to address the crisis caused by the evictions. However,
donors have become increasingly frustrated by the government’s obduracy in
dealing comprehensively with the humanitarian crisis caused by the evictions.
The government’s refusal to sign a U.N. emergency appeal to help those
affected by the evictions and to make a formal appeal for food aid added to
already existing tensions with western governments.
Western governments, in particular the United Kingdom and the United
States, have failed to convince other influential governments (especially those
in the South) to take a stronger stand on Zimbabwe at forums such as the
U.N. Security Council. China, Russia and other African countries state that
Zimbabwe does not warrant discussions at the Security Council because they
claim it is not a threat to international peace or security.