Zimbabwe
The human rights situation in Zimbabwe continues to be of grave concern.
Repressive laws such as the Public Order and Security Act (POSA)
and the Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA)
remain in place. The government continues to use these laws to suppress
criticism of government and public debate, and those most affected
included representatives of Zimbabwe civil society, opposition party
supporters, and the independent media.
The government also tabled in parliament new legislation regulating
the operations of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and the
AIPPA Amendment Bill which reportedly seeks to tighten existing
media laws. Concerns were expressed that these new laws would further
curtail fundamental rights to freedom of expression and association.
Food security remains a pressing issue and concerns have been raised
about the availability of food and the risk of political interference in
food distribution in the run-up to parliamentary elections in March
2005.
Elections
Serious concerns also exist about whether parliamentary elections,
scheduled for March 2005, will be free and fair. The last two elections
in Zimbabwe were marked by widespread violence and serious electoral
irregularities.
In July 2004, the government announced that it would undertake electoral
reforms that would comply with guidelines drafted by the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). In October, the
government tabled in parliament the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission
(ZEC) Bill, which would establish an independent authority to administer
all elections and referendums in Zimbabwe. The main opposition party, Movement for Democratic Change (MDC,) dismissed the government’s
attempts at electoral reform, and argued that they were
superficial and failed to address much needed electoral changes. Morgan
Tsvangirai, the leader of the MDC, also called for the postponement of
the elections to allow for reform of Zimbabwe’s electoral laws and
processes. However, the government insisted that elections would take
place as scheduled.
An inclusive national electoral institution would make a significant contribution
to the holding of free and fair parliamentary elections.
However, there were concerns that the ZEC bill did little to enhance
the prospects of a free and fair election. There were questions about the
independence of the electoral commission, and confusion over the functions
of the commission and other electoral bodies. The proposed law
would also centralize control over voter education in the Commission,
thereby restricting the role of NGOs. Moreover, an independent electoral
commission would not be a remedy for repressive laws such as
POSA and AIPPA that have contributed to an uneven playing field.
It remains to be seen whether the government would fully implement
electoral reform and create an environment conducive to a fair electoral
process in time for the March 2005 elections.
Freedom of Expression and Association
In October 2004, the Non-Governmental Organizations Draft Bill was
tabled in parliament for discussion and debate. If enacted, the law would
require NGOs to register with a government-appointed Council of
NGOs that would have virtually unchecked power to investigate and
audit the groups’ activities and funding. National and foreign NGOs
would be required to register with the Council by submitting the
“names, nationality and addresses of its promoters,” and sources of
funding. Registration could be denied or withdrawn at any time if the
Council determined that the organization “ceased to operate bona fide in furtherance of the objects for which it was registered.” The law would
also empower the Council to constantly monitor NGOs, and noncompliance
with its rules and regulations would result in fines and imprisonment
with no possibility of recourse to the courts.
Of particular concern were the limitations that the proposed law would
place on NGOs active on issues of governance, including human rights.
The draft law stated that no foreign NGO would be registered if “its
sole or principal objects involve or include issues of governance.”
Similarly, local organizations working on matters such as governance
issues would be barred from receiving “any foreign funding or donation.”
The proposed law would undermine fundamental freedoms of
association and expression and place each and every NGO at the whim
of the government.
Food Security
On May 12, 2004, the government announced that Zimbabwe would
not require general food aid from the international community or food
imports in 2004-5, as it had predicted a bumper harvest.
Representatives of NGOs, United Nations agencies, and donor countries
feel, however, that the government has over-stated the crop yield
and that a large number of rural and urban Zimbabweans will require
assistance as the year progresses.
In June, a member of Parliament raised questions about the government’s
estimate, leading Parliament to authorize an investigation. If the
government’s projections of a bumper crop were not met,
Zimbabweans’ primary access to food assistance would be through the
government’s Grain Marketing Board (GMB.) Since 2002, donors have
provided food aid to Zimbabweans through a program separate from
the GMB program. The government’s persistence, however, in permitting
the GMB to conduct its operations and distribution practices without
transparency rendered uncertain Zimbabweans’ access to domestically-managed food assistance. GMB distributions were often irregular
and insufficient to meet high demands. Many Zimbabweans also cannot
afford to buy the GMB’s subsidized maize.
Problems with access to food could also be compounded in the months
approaching the parliamentary elections in March 2005. Representatives
of civil society, relief agencies, and donor countries warned that access
to subsidized maize distributed by the GMB was likely to be subject to
political interference in the pre-election period, with supporters of the
opposition suffering most, as had been reported to have been the case in
previous elections. Relief agencies expect interference in and restrictions
on their operations during the election run-up, including their targeted
feeding programs that provide food to acutely vulnerable
Zimbabweans, such as orphans and households with chronically ill
members.
In late November 2004, it was reported that the government would
allow the World Food Programme to distribute 60000 tons of food aid.
Key International Actors
In August 2004, SADC approved the Principles and Guidelines
Governing Democratic Elections, which require member states holding
elections to “safeguard the human and civil liberties of all citizens,
including the freedom of movement, assembly, association, expression
and campaigning during electoral processes.” More significantly, all
SADC member states, including Zimbabwe, signed the SADC electoral
protocol, and agreed to hold elections in line with these principles.
The South African government continued to play a principal role in
trying to improve the situation in Zimbabwe. In October 2004,
President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa—current chair of the SADC
Organ on Politics, Defense and Security—held discussions with Morgan
Tsvangirai , the MDC leader, on the situation in Zimbabwe and the forthcoming parliamentary elections. Morgan Tsvangirai also flew to
Mauritius to hold discussions with President Paul Berenger in his
capacity as chair of SADC.
In July 2004, the African Union (A.U.) adopted a critical report on the
human rights situation in Zimbabwe. The report was prepared by
experts from the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights,
based on a mission to Zimbabwe around the 2002 elections. The adoption
of the report was seen as a significant step by the AU in addressing
Zimbabwe’s human rights record.
The European Union formally renewed sanctions on Zimbabwe in
February 2004. The Union added another year to sanctions that were
first imposed in 2002. It decided to keep in place measures that ban
nearly 100 Zimbabwean government officials from entering the E.U.,
and froze any assets they might hold in Europe. The E.U. also decided
to extend an embargo on shipments of military supplies to Zimbabwe.
These sanctions have not had the anticipated effect, and Zimbabwe government
officials have been able to attend international meetings hosted
by E.U. countries.