Zimbabwe
The brutal response of President Robert Mugabe and the ruling Zimbabwe African
National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) to their loss in general elections in
March 2008 plunged Zimbabwe deep into political turmoil. After a month’s delay
in releasing the results of the presidential poll, the Zimbabwe Electoral
Commission declared that opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)
leader Morgan Tsvangirai had failed to win by a 50-percent-plus-one vote majority,
necessitating a run-off on June 27.
ZANU-PF launched a campaign of violence against MDC activists and supporters,
mobilizing a system of repression and violent intimidation that remained in place,
if less overtly active, at the end of the year. The months leading up to the run-off
were marked by widespread abuses, including killings, torture, beatings, looting,
and burning of property. Perpetrators, including the police, military, and local
ZANU-PF officials, as well as government-backed militia and war veterans, committed
abuses with almost absolute impunity. At least 163 people were killed and
some 5,000 were tortured or beaten. Tens of thousands more were displaced by
the violence, which eventually forced Tsvangirai to withdraw from the poll, leaving
Mugabe to declare himself the winner.
In September, in the face of international pressure and a severely weakened
economy, Mugabe signed a power-sharing agreement with Tsvangirai under the
mediation of then-president Thabo Mbeki of South Africa. However, the frailty of
the deal was soon apparent as the parties rapidly reached a deadlock on the distribution
of ministries, with violence and intimidation against the MDC still taking
place. Zimbabwe’s political situation remains precarious, and the future looks
bleak if the political leadership does not end abuses and address accountability
for both past and present abuses.
Post-Election Violence and Repression
The build up to the March elections was generally peaceful, despite some flaws in
the electoral process. However, the months afterwards were marked by a well
planned and systematic campaign of violence by ZANU-PF and its allies. In an
attempt to overturn the vote in the presidential run-off, government-backed militia and war veterans, ZANU-PF officials and supporters, and senior military officers
waged a vicious campaign of intimidation against MDC activists and suspected
supporters. Entire villages were cordoned off and those suspected of having
voted for the MDC were brutally beaten and tortured. The militia and war veterans
beat, tortured, and mutilated suspected MDC activists, supporters, and their family
members in hundreds of base camps—many of them army bases—established
across the provinces as local operation centers. Thousands of people were forced
to attend abusive “re-education” meetings. Suspected ZANU-PF supporters and
militia targeted and killed up to 163 MDC activists.
In an effort to subvert the run-off electoral process and instill fear in election officials
and observers, police arrested more than 100 presiding officers and election
officials on politically motivated charges of electoral fraud. Police also arrested
hundreds of MDC supporters and officials on spurious charges of inciting violence,
while ZANU-PF supporters, who were responsible for the majority of the violence,
were allowed to carry out abuses with almost absolute impunity.
Impunity and the Rule of Law
Zimbabwe’s long history of impunity for politically motivated crimes has worsened
the political crisis. Those who committed past abuses have remained free to
carry out further violence and other crimes. Since 2000 the government has led
an onslaught on the judiciary that has included physical and verbal attacks
against judges and bribes intended to compromise the impartiality and undermine
the work of the judiciary.
Law enforcement agencies have subverted the rule of law. The police are responsible
for widespread violations, including harassment, threats, and violence
against opposition supporters and human rights activists, as well as torture and
other mistreatment. Police have routinely refused to take action against ZANU-PF
supporters and militia implicated in political violence.
Public confidence in the judiciary and police—especially regarding independence
and impartiality—is eroded. There have been no investigations into the role of
senior government, military, and ruling party officials implicated in mobilizing
and inciting militia forces responsible for election-related violence.
Human Rights Defenders
The violence in the aftermath of the general elections created an even more challenging
environment for human rights defenders. Many NGOs are perceived by
the government of Zimbabwe as being aligned to the MDC. In the capital Harare,
the government clampdown forced several NGOs to shut down. In the months
after March elections, police raided the offices of NGOs such as the Crisis in
Zimbabwe Coalition and the Zimbabwe Election Support Network (ZESN). ZANUPF
supporters attacked hundreds of ZESN election observers, forcing many to flee
their homes. Human rights defenders were intimidated and threatened by police
and security agents, who in May and June arrested a number of activists, including
a prominent human rights lawyer and 13 members of the NGO Women of
Zimbabwe Arise.
Humanitarian Crisis
Zimabwe’s humanitarian crisis shows no signs of ending, with more than 1.3 million
Zimbabweans living with HIV, and millions of people facing ever more severe
food shortages. According to the United Nations, nearly half the population will
need food aid in 2009 and the contamination of water sources has resulted in
cholera outbreaks. In June 2008 the government exacerbated the humanitarian
situation by banning the operations of all local and international humanitarian
agencies throughout the country. Despite lifting the ban in September, the government
has tightened control over agency operations. To operate in a specific
area, NGOs must obtain permission and a memorandum of understanding from
the relevant government ministry. Restrictive government controls have left the
delivery of humanitarian assistance open to manipulation by government agents
and ZANU-PF officials. In the past, the government has used food aid as a political
weapon against opposition supporters. The new government will face the
challenge of addressing the humanitarian crisis in the context of an extraordinarily
weakened economy, in which inflation has soared to over 200 million percent.
Key International Actors
Previous inaction to address Zimbabwe’s political crisis by regional bodies such
as the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the African Union (AU) emboldened the government of Zimbabwe to turn the institutions of state
even more aggressively against Zimbabweans seeking democratic change.
Instead, African leaders put their faith in the mediation of Thabo Mbeki, initiated
on behalf of SADC in 2007 following a widely reported incident of police brutality
against Morgan Tsvangirai and other MDC officials. While this led to some
improvements in the electoral process leading up to the March elections, it failed
to address the root causes of Zimbabwe’s political crisis—the government’s systematic
violation of international human rights standards.
The serious violence after the March elections finally compelled several African
leaders to publicly condemn abuses, although other countries, including South
Africa, initially refused to acknowledge the serious nature of the situation.
Differing positions within SADC prevented it from taking concerted and decisive
action. At an emergency SADC summit on April 12, leaders expressed concern
about the delay in the release of the presidential results, but did little to address
spiraling violence and other abuses.
As the violence intensified before the June presidential run-off, SADC and AU election
observers declared that it would not be free and fair. Once again African
leaders failed to take a robust approach. In June at the AU heads of state summit
in Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt, leaders not only ignored ZANU-PF’s responsibility for
the widespread violence, but failed to recognize the illegitimacy of Mugabe’s
presidency. The summit participants issued a weak resolution calling for negotiations
between the two political parties, but not mentioning the violence. To their
credit, several African leaders spoke publicly in condemnation of the run-off and
Mugabe’s brutal actions. The leaders of Botswana and Nigeria made it clear that
they did not recognize Mugabe as Zimbabwe’s president.
In September Mbeki’s mediation led to the MDC and ZANU-PF signing a powersharing
agreement meant to bring an end to the political crisis. However, both
parties remain deadlocked over the division of ministerial positions, and there
have been few efforts to address abuses or accountability. The role of SADC and
the AU remains crucial in ensuring a peaceful return to the rule of law and respect
for human rights, but the ongoing situation is a blot on the credibility of their
commitment to an effective regional solution. 
The European Union, United States, and United Kingdom have each consistently
condemned the government’s abusive record, and maintained travel sanctions
and asset freezes against senior government and ZANU-PF officials. Despite the
power-sharing agreement, EU officials have indicated that sanctions and asset
freezes will remain until there is a return to democracy and marked improvement
in human rights conditions. International aid to reconstruct the country is also
likely to remain on hold until human rights conditions improve and democracy is
restored.
The ability of the UN Security Council to address the crisis was largely nullified by
China, Russia, and South Africa refusing to determine that the situation was a
threat to international peace and security. Nonetheless, UN Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon on numerous occasions expressed concern and appointed UN
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Haile Menkerios as a special envoy
for Zimbabwe.