Zimbabwe
Two years into Zimbabwe’s power-sharing government, President Robert Mugabe
and the Zimbabwe African National Union- Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) have used
violence and repression to continue to dominate government institutions and
hamper meaningful human rights progress. The former opposition party, the
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), lacks real power to institute its political
agenda and end human rights abuses.
The power-sharing government has not investigated widespread abuses, including
killings, torture, beatings, and other ill-treatment committed by the army,
ZANU-PF supporters, and officials against real and perceived supporters of the
MDC.
Political Violence during Constitutional Outreach Program
In 2010 the power-sharing government began a series of community outreach
meetings called the Constitutional Outreach Program to elicit popular views on a
new constitution. However, the meetings were marked by increasing violence and
intimidation, mainly by ZANU-PF supporters and war veterans allied to ZANU-PF.
In February police disrupted MDC-organized preparatory constitutional reform
meetings, beat participants, and arbitrarily arrested 43 people in Binga, 48 in
Masvingo, and 52 in Mt. Darwin. The violence worsened in Harare, the capital,
and led to the suspension of 13 meetings in September.
On September 19, ZANU-PF supporters attacked MDC supporters and prevented
some from attending an outreach meeting in Mbare, Harare. The meeting ended
when violence broke out. ZANU-PF supporters and uniformed police assaulted 11
residents and MDC supporters from Mbare with blunt objects as they left the
meeting. One resident, Chrispen Mandizvidza, died from his injuries on
September 22.
Human Rights Violations in Marange Diamond Fields
Diamond revenue, particularly from the Marange diamond fields in eastern
Zimbabwe, is providing a parallel source of revenue for ZANU-PF and its repressive state apparatus. Companies with connections to ZANU-PF are mining diamonds
in Marange, where military control and abuses continue. Corruption is rife,
and smuggling of diamonds by soldiers in the fields is prolific. The diamond revenues
continue to benefit a few senior people in the government and their associates
rather than the people of Zimbabwe. Soldiers continue to perpetrate abuses
in Marange, including forced labor, beatings, and harassment, which
Zimbabwe’s government has failed to investigate or prosecute.
State security agents have harassed local civil society organizations attempting to
document smuggling and abuses in the fields. On June 3, police arrested Farai
Maguwu, the head of the Centre for Research and Development, after he provided
sensitive information on the activities of soldiers in the fields to Abbey Chikane, a
monitor appointed by the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, an international
body that oversees the diamond trade (also known as the Kimberley Process).
Police also beat, arrested, and detained members of Maguwu’s family. Maguwu
was charged with “communicating and publishing falsehoods against the State
with the intention to cause prejudice to the security or economic interests of the
country” under section 31 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act.
The Kimberley Process has struggled to address state abuses in the fields. It’s
mandate narrowly defines “blood diamonds” as those mined by abusive rebel
groups, not abusive governments. In November 2010, at their annual meeting in
Jerusalem, Israel, Kimberley Process members failed to reach a consensus on
whether Zimbabwe should be allowed to resume exports of diamonds from parts
of the Marange diamond fields. However, Zimbabwe threatened to go ahead with
diamond exports, arguing that it had met the minimum standards required by the
Kimberley Process.
Media Freedom and Freedom of Expression
With ZANU-PF still in control, the power-sharing government continues to use an
arsenal of repressive legislation and unlawful tactics to restrict the right to freedom
of expression, and harass and punish critical journalists. While the government
has lifted restrictions on the international media and allowed independent
local daily papers to resume operations, it has not reformed media-related laws
as promised. It has also not reviewed criminal defamation laws that impose severe penalties, including prison terms, on journalists. The government continues
to block free expression through senior officials aligned to ZANU-PF and partisan
state security agents.
Journalists and media practitioners routinely face arrest for allegedly violating the
state’s repressive media laws. On January 17, police arrested Barnabas
Madzimure and Fortune Mutandiro, two directors of a distribution company for
The Zimbabwean, a weekly newspaper published in South Africa and distributed
in Zimbabwe. The police questioned them for two hours about the operations of
the newspaper and then released them. On February 11, they were charged as
accomplices in “publishing falsehoods prejudicial to the state” in violation of the
Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act.
Journalists and media outlets have also been subjected to threats and harassment
from the authorities and security forces, creating major obstacles to reporting
on Zimbabwe’s political system and continuing abuses by ZANU-PF. On
January 16 freelance journalist Stanley Kwenda was forced to flee the country, following
death threats from a senior police officer. The death threats were prompted
by a story that Kwenda wrote for The Zimbabwean. The story reported that a
named senior police officer had barred Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai from visiting
police stations across the country.
In an example of restrictions on freedom of expression, police arrested artist
Owen Maseko on March 26 after he displayed an exhibition that portrayed massacres
that took place in Matabeleland in the 1980s, allegedly carried out by
troops loyal to President Mugabe. Maseko was initially arrested on charges of violating
section 33 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act for insulting or
undermining the authority of the president. The charges were later altered to section
31 of the same act which deals with the publication of false statements prejudicial
to the state. Maseko spent four days in police custody before he was
released on bail, and is awaiting trial at this writing.
Human Rights Defenders
The working environment for human rights defenders continues to be restrictive.
For example, 83 men and women from the group Women of Zimbabwe Arise were arrested in Harare on September 20 as they demonstrated against the lack of professionalism
by the Zimbabwean police. The group was detained at the Harare
Central Police Station for two days. On September 22 they were charged with
criminal nuisance under the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act and
released on free bail.
In a raid at the offices of the organization Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ)
on May 21, police arrested staff members Ellen Chadenama and Ignatius Mhambi,
charging them with possession of “obscene, indecent or prohibited articles” and
confiscating educational material. On May 24 a Zimbabwean magistrate’s court
added the charge of “undermining authority of or insulting [the] president”
because the GALZ office displayed a placard that made a critical reference to
President Mugabe. Two days later police searched the house of the acting director
of GALZ, confiscating his birth certificate, several GALZ magazines, books, and
business cards. Chadenama and Mhambi spent six days in detention before they
were released on bail; they pleaded not guilty to the charges. Mhambi and
Chadenama reported that they were physically assaulted by the police while in
custody. Mhambi said that police hit him with empty glass bottles on his knees.
The arrests, which Human Rights Watch considers to be politically motivated,
occurred shortly before the opening of the Constitutional Outreach Program,
through which GALZ is seeking to remove discriminatory provisions and secure
constitutional protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. The
trial is ongoing at this writing although Mthambi has been acquitted of the first
charge.
Rule of Law
In a worrying development for respect for the rule of law, heads of state of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), at their annual summit in
August, upheld Zimbabwe’s objections to the jurisdiction of the SADC Tribunal.
Zimbabwe formally withdrew from the tribunal, arguing that the court did not
exist by law. In 2008 the tribunal ruled in favor of 79 white commercial farmers
who took the government to the tribunal in a bid to block the compulsory acquisition
of their farms by the state, and has made a number of other rulings against
the state. Zimbabwe’s courts have refused to enforce rulings by the tribunal.
Key International Actors
The South African government deepened its engagement with the power-sharing
government, but failed to make full use of its leverage to ensure meaningful
human rights improvements. Despite visiting the country several times, President
Jacob Zuma and his mediation team have failed to engage the power-sharing government
on critical issues that include cessation of human rights abuses, institutional
reform targeting constitutional and electoral processes, as well as security
sector reform.
Instead Zuma and other heads of state from the SADC community have called for
the lifting of targeted sanctions against President Mugabe and his inner circle,
arguing that these were a major obstacle to the progress of the power-sharing
government. In September SADC announced that it had asked for regional leaders
to embark on a tour of the United States and European Union calling for the lifting
of sanctions. In the absence of meaningful progress, the US and the EU have
maintained targeted sanctions on Mugabe and others within his government.